<!-- __ _ _ _ __| |_ (_)__ _____
    / _` | '_/ _| ' \| |\ V / -_)
    \__,_|_| \__|_||_|_| \_/\___| -->

      <pre>The Voynich Manuscript: 
An Elegant Enigma 


M. E. D’Imperio 


1978 


National Security Agency/Central Security Service 
Fail Georfe G. Meade. Maryland 


jJsTrZ Ul r Z\‘, COm iTl ‘ nd ? 4k ' S " * ran ' tht inclusion. but Jots nor make rbt conclusion ceruun. nor 

eZJ.Z TtZ/° ”7 "* "* ° n ,ht ,nUut,on °f tnah - ***** **&gt;* ***** discovers „ by rbt path of 

experience Therefore reasoning Joes not suffice, but experience Joes. 


Roger Bacon. Opus M*|us ( Burke ■ 


I 


Contents 


Pape 

List of Figures - - - - * 

Foreword - — -------- vii 

Introduction . ... ----- - - ls 

1 The Known Facts . .. --------- * 

1.1 The Manuscript As Found — ------ 1 

1.2 The Known History of the Manuscript * - - 

2 Avenue* of Attack on the Problem: A Survey ------------ ■ - :i 

2.1 Conjectures Concerning the History of the Manuscript 3 

2.2 Authorship and Purpose - - . - r&gt; 

2.2.1 A Hoax, a Forgery* or Nonsense? , ■ - s 

2.2.2 Who Wrote It. and Why? « _ _ 6 

2.3 Pr »venience and Underlying Language — 

2.4 Date of Origin - . * 

3 Avenues of Attack: The Drawings II 

3.1 Relationship of the Drawings to the Teat 11 

3.2 Nature and Charset eristics of the Drawings .. , 11 

3.2.1 Provenience and Style _ .... 12 

3.2.2 Pigments and Inks 12 

3.2.3 Relationships to Some Other 111 ustra ted Manuscripts 12 

3.3 Content of Specific Claws of Drawings 14 

3.3.1 Herbal Drawings . _ ........... 14 

3.3.2 Pharmaceutical Drawings .... 16 

3.3.3 Astrological and Astronomical Drawings ............ . .. .. ... 16 

3.3.4 Cosmological or Meteorological Drawings . ... IT 

3.3.5 Drawings Featuring Human Figures . . . 20 

3.3.6 Network of Rosettes, Folios 85-66 , , - . . . ■ 21 

3.3.7 Small Marginal Designs _ 21 

3.4 Meaning of the Collection of Drawings as a Whole ...... . 22 

4 Avenues of Attack: The Text _ * __ ... 23 

4.1 Nature and Characteristics of the Voynich Script 23 

4.1.1 Provenience and Style . . 23 

4.1.2 Relationships to Known Scripts and Character Sets * _ 23 

4.1.3 Attempts to Decompose the Symbols into Elements _ ... 23 

4.1.4 Variant and Embellished Forms of Symbols .* ........ ... 24 

4.2 Other Scripts and Hands _ _ _ 25 

4.3 Linear Sequences that Look Like M Keys" .... 26 

4.4 CryptanaJyric and Stylistic Attacks on the Text 27 

4.4.1 Phenomena in the Text Which Musi be Accounted for by Any Theory ..... 2? 

4.4.2 Cryptanalytic Hypothesis .. 2S 

5 Major Claims of Deciphermen t 33 

5.1 Sewbotd . 33 

5.1.1 The Latin Text Cipher 33 

5.1.2 The Shorthand Cipher .... 34 

5.2 Feeiy 35 

5.3 Strong 36 

5.4 Brumbaugh 37 

6 History of Other Substantial Analytic Efforts 39 

6.1 The Forms in Which the Manuscript Has Been Studied 39 

iil 


Page 

6 .2 First Voynich Manuscript Study Group, 1944-1946 .. .. * - - 40 

6.3 Theodore C. Petersen . * — — - 41 

6.4 Second Voynich Manuscript Study Group, 1962-1963 . . .... 41 

6.5 William F. Friedman _ — » -- 42 

6.6 John H. Tiltman * --- - — 42 

6.7 Jeffrey Kmcher ..... --- 44 

6.8 Prescott Currier . . . _ - . - - - 45 

6.9 Some Comments Regarding Computer Methods .... - - - . 45 

7 Collateral Research; Roger Bacon - ----- 47 

7.1 Works By and About Roger Bacon ---. — * * — - - 47 

7.2 Bacon's Life and Works . - - 46 

7 .3 Survival and Significance of Bacon s Work in Later Times - . . - — 49 

7.4 Wae Roger Bacon Associated with the Voynich Manuscript? - . * - - - . - ... 50 

6 Collateral Research: Medieval and Renaissance Cosmology and Iconography ... 53 

8.1 Am Memorativa: The Art of Memory * ... 53 

8-2 The Hermetic Tradition . . - . . - — 55 

8.3 Astrology and Astronomy , ... -- 56 

8.4 Magical Systems . _ ... - - , - 56 

8.4.1 Picatrix - - . 57 

8.4.2 Solomotiian Magical Tradition — 57 

8.4.3 Abramelinian Magical System , - ... 57 

8.4.4 John Dees System of Spiritual Magic ........ * ...... ... 5fl 

8.5 The Galenic Medical Tradition - . . - - - - - 58 

8.6 Art Notoria: Demonic and Angelic Magic 59 

8.7 Cabala .... - 59 

8.8 Alchemy.- .. GO 

8.9 The Roeicrucian Movement and John Dee * - 61 

8.10 The History of the Hindu -Arabic Numerals * . ... * - - - 63 

8.11 Medieval and Renaissance Costume - - ... . 64 

9 Collateral Research: Artificial and Secret Languages . , _ Go 

9.1 Brachygraphy: The History of Shorthand 65 

9. 1. 1 Characters (Thomas Bright, circa 1588) 65 

9.L2 Brachygraphie (Peter Bales, circa 1590) 1 ■ - 66 

9.1.3 Stenographic (John Willis, 1602) - . .. . , - 66 

9.2 Steganography: The Early History of Cryptology — .... 66 

9.3 Pasigraphy : Universal and Synthetic Languages - - . - . - — 68 

9.4 Magical and Religious Languages and Alphabets .. --~ 69 

9.4.1 Magical Languages . 6$ 

9.4.2 Alchemical, Medical, and Astrological Symbols „ . - 69 

9.4.3 Mystical and Religious Languages . .. - 70 

9.4.4 The Enochian Language of John Dee * , 70 

10 Collateral Research: Early Herbs Is and Materia Med ica * . . . 73 

1 1 Concluding Remarks: Some Suggestion* for Further Research - * - 77 

II , 1 Paleographic and Other Studies of the Manuscript - 77 

11.2 Uncovering More of the Manuscripts History * * - -------- 77 

11.3 Collateral Research .... - - - - 77 

11-4 A Comprehensive Machine File of the Text - 78 

11.5 Scientific Hypothesis Formation and Testing - - - 78 

Bibliography .... ** **..*_. , — 124 

Index - - .. - ----- 133. 


iv 


List of Figures 

Fig* No. Page 

1 Entry for the Voynich Manuscript from H. F, Kraus Catalogue * - . ~9 

2 Letter Found with the Manuscript * ^ 

3 Translation of Letter ...... ^ 

4 List of Folio Numbers and Apparent Subject Matter . _ *- 

5 Some Details from Herbal and Pharmaceutical Folios 

6 More Details from Herbal and Pharmaceutical Folios . . . - * ^ 

7 Details from Herbal Folios . 35 

8 More Details from Herbal Folios - . — 36 

9 Details from Herbal and Pharmaceutical Folios^ . . — 37 

10 Some Zodiac Medallions and Mtrnth Names ... 33 

U Groupings of Human Figures in Astrological Drawings - 39 

12 Groupings of Elements in Astrological and Cosmological Folios 90 

13 Groupings of Elements in Human Figure Folios 91 

14 ?:ome Medieval Tables of Correspondences: Ones, Twos. Threes 92 

15 Details from Pharmaceutical and “Human Figure” Folios 

16 Comparison of Voynich Symbols and Early Arabic Numerals ........ 94 

17 Comparison of Voynich Sym bols and Latin Abbreviations 9^ 

18 Some Compound and Ligatured Forms . . 96 

19 Transcription Alphabets of Several Researchers . . ... . 97 

20 Some Embellished and Variant Forms of Voynich Symbols . 98 

21 Details Showing Fragments of Writing in Extraneous Scripts 99 

22 Folio Gatherings HX) 

23 ' Some Different Readings of Folio L16v 101 

24 “Key"* Like Sequences .. . ------ 102 

25 Feely's Initial “Clews” and Cipher Alphabet 103 

26 Brumbaugh’s Results ,. 104 

27 Tiltman's Division of Common Words into “Roots” and “Suffixes” * 105 

2B Monographic Frequency Counts of Some S indents * _ . 106 

29 Names of Fifteen Fixed Stars ................ . . * . . . . 107 

30 Stations of the Moon ... : 108 

31 Names of the Thiny -Six Decans 109 

32 Some Magical Seals and Talismans _ * * , . . . 1 10 

33 Some Demon and Angel Names ........ 111 

34 Dements of Galenic Medicine ... . 112 

35 Some Elements of Cabala 113 

36 Two Alchemical Drawings 114 

37 Some Costume Elements in Voynich Manuscript Drawings ....... 115 

36 Early Shorthand Systems . . 116 

39 Some Early Italian Cryptographic Systems 1 1 7 

40 Jakob Silvesters Code 118 

41 Some Magical Spells and Invocations 119 

42 Some Alchemy Symbols ............ 120 

43 Two Mystical Religious Languages ...... L21 

44 A Sample of Enochian Text 122 

45 Another Sample of Enochian Text 123 


v 


Foreword 


The history of my connection with the Voynich manuscript is as follows: in 1951 Mr. William F. Friedman introduced 
me to che manuscript and 1 spent my spare time in studying the combinations of the most com monk occurring symbols 1 
wrote a report of my work for Mr. Friedman, I should mention that che only parr of the manuscript which was available to 
me at the time was the rwenty pages at the end which contain no illustrations. In fan he deli berate! v used me as a 
control — he told me nothing other than the information about the manuscript contained in the book The Cipher of Roger 
Bacon by Newbold. On the strength of this study \ came to the rather definite conclusion that the text could not have been 
arrived at merely by the substitution of single symbols for lecrers whatever the language involved 

Subsequently about twelve yean ago I read a paper to the Bain more Bibliophiles covering the historv of the manuscript 
and some of the attempts to decipher it. This paper, almost unaltered, was printed in an internal office journal. 

In the fall of 1975 I read a paper on the subject to a group of colleagues. As this occasion was rather widely advertised 
within the organuation. it attracted quite a large audience and the attention of some of those who attended was draw n to the 
study of the manuscript 

From the time when Mr. Friedman s health began to fail* 1 have acted as a sort of unofficial coordinator of the work ot 
some of the people who have been working on the problem, and when Miss Mary Dlmperio told me of her interest. J 
suggested that she should assume this respomibility. 

She has written a far more comprehensive and more scholarly survey of the problem rhan mine and ir will. I believe, 
become the definitive background of future work in this field. 

To mv knowledge rhere have been three rather extensive analyses of the script of che manuscript, by Mr Friedman, bv 
me, and by Captain Prescott Currier. Of these, I believe Captain Currier s to be far the most complete. All three have 
reached similar conclusions at any rate in some aspens, and I find myself quite unable to accept any suggested solution unless 
it takes account of these analyses. 

John H. Tiirman 
24 November L9^6 


Vll 


Introduction 


The reader may well wonder. "Why still another paper on the Voynich manuscript/" So much has been written ahead v 
on that most studied, most curious, and most mysterious manuscript upon which so many researchers have exhausted cheir 
faculties in vain. Perhaps a few words of explanation might be useful in setting the stage for the reader, and in presenting the 
motivation for this monograph. 

As a relatively recent newcomer to the ranks of Vovnich manuscript students. 1 have unwittingly retraced the steps of all 
mv predecessors, rediscovering their sources, repeating their experiments, growing excited over the same promising leads that 
excited them, and learning onlv later that all these things had already been tried and had failed, often several times. I have 
no wish to impiv that I regret any of my efforts. In fact, I little suspected, when I was first introduced to the problem of the 
Voynich manuscript at Brigadier Tilcmans lecture in November 1975, that I would spend ail mv spare time for the next 
vear on an intellectual and spinrual journey spanning so many centuries and ranging over so many aspects of art. hittorv. 
philosophy, and philology, I have thoroughly enjoyed every moment of mv investigations, and would not give them up atanv 
price. 

The fact remains that, in spite of all the papers that others have written aboui the manuscript, there is. to m v knowledge, 
no compete survey of all the approaches, ideas, background information and analytic studies that have accumulated over the 
nearly fitfv-five rears since the manuscript was discovered by Wilfrid M Vovnich in 1912. Most of the papers have been 
written either to advance or to refute a particular theory, providing in passing a brief glance at others efforts, primarily to 
sweep rhem out of the way. Some presentations provide good treatments of some aspects of the problem, nocablv those bv 
Voynich 4 1921), Newbold (1928), Tiltman (19681. and Krischcr f 1969K Much vital information, however, is to be found 
only in unpublished notes and papers inaccessible to most students. I have felt that it would be useful to pull together all the 
information I could obtain from all the sources I have examined, and to present it in an orderly fashion, I hope that the 
resulting survey will provide a firm basis upon which ocher students may build their work, whether thev seek to decipher the 
text or simply to learn more about the problem. 

This monograph will be arranged in four mam sections. First I will present a survtv of alt the basic facts of the problem: 
the givens r . u it were. Second, 1 will try to cover all the pnmarv avenues of attack and the information relevant to each, 
the external characteristics of the manuscript itself, the drawings, and the text. Third. I will survey the major claims of 
decipherment and other substantial analytic work carried out by various researchers. Fourth. 1 will provide a rapid sketch of 
collateral and background topics which seem likely io be useful. An extensive bibliography is included, comprising books and 
papers on the Vovnich manuscript itself and on a variety of related topics. 

1 wish to express my appreciation for the generous aid of John H. Tillman, without whose encouragement this mono- 
graph would never have been completed. I wish also to thank Stuart Buck. Edwm S. Spiegelrhal. and Stuart MacChmock. 
who proofread my manuscript and offered many helpful mutisms and suggestions. 


ix 


Chapter 1 
The Known Facts 


l A The Manuscript As Found 

It set ms important first of all to distinguish dearly between the givens — the incontrovertible tacts available to -all sty dents 
of the manuscript— and the lush growth of conjecture that has accumulated around the few meagre certainties we have. A 
dear physical description of the codex itself is provided by several authors. The entry in the catalogue of H. P. Kraus 
(antiquarian bookdeaier and owner of the manuscript for a number of vears) provides an excellent* compact sketch (see 
figure 1 S. In brief, the mysterious manuscript consists -in a^amaU quarto volume, with leaves of varving size but of an average 
nine by six inches, some multiply folded. Most pages contain, in addition to copious text in the unknown script (which I will 
call the “Voynich script" throughout this paper), colored pictures of considerable variety, whose meaning is open to 
conjecture. Most appear to represent plants, astrological or cosmological material, and pharmaceutical recipes, while j few 
show human figures surrounded by bizarre objects in scenes of undetermined import. The text and drawings will be studied 
in considerable detail in Chapters 3 and 4. 

The manuscript has no cover; the first page contains only four brief paragraphs of text without pictures, but with an 
apparent crude attempt at rubrication by means of enlarged and embellished initial characters in red ink. The Last page shows 
a few lines of writing near the top. in a different script or mixture of scripts than the bulk of the text, along with a few 
svmbols from the Voynich script, and a scattering of sketthv drawings of animals, people, and other unidentifiable objects in 
the upper left corner. Some leaves in the body of the manuscript also contain jottings (largely illegible) in scripts and hands 
apparently differing from the majority of the text. These atypical scraps of writing will be dealt with more fullv below 

We have one other bit of concrete data to exploit: a letter, found between the pages of the manuscript bv Wilfrid 
Vovruch. Figure 2 shows this letter, and figure 3 provides its translation from Latin as prepared for Vovnich and published 
bv him (1921, p. 27). The letter was written bv Joannas Marcus Marci in Prague to accompanv his gift of the manuscript in 
Athanasius Kircher, S. J., in Rome. The letter adds the following solid facts to our knowledge t'as fleshed out bv the research 
of Vovruch, which he describes in interesting detail in the work cited above ) : 

The manuscript was in the hands of Joann us Marcus Marci (A.D 1 595-1667 L official physician to Emperor Rudolph II 
of Bohemia (A. D. 1352-1612). in the vear 1665 or 1666. 

It had previously been in the possession of one or more other persons, otherwise unidentified, probably associated with the 
court of Rudolph II. 

It passed from the possession of Marci to Athanasius Kircher in 1665 or 1666. and remained m his hands for an 
unknown period of time. 

It had been sold to Rudolph by an unidentified person at in unstated time for the large sum of 600 ducats, according to 
information provided to Marci bv a Dr. Raphael Missowskv (A.D. 1580-1644), who was a familiar at the courts of 
Rudolph and his successors. 

Another nugget of information was wrested from the enigmatic pages of the manuscript itself as a result of a fortunate 
accident. A mishap during photographic reproduction of the manuscript revealed a partially erased signature on the first 
page. Examined under infra -red light* this signature was found to be "Jacobi 1 Tepenece”, that of a man identified bv 
Voynich as jacobus Hordckv de Tepenecz (d. 1622), This man was director of Rudolph s botanical gardens and alchemical 
laboratory' He did not acquire the patent of nobility with the title “de Tepenecz until after 1608, Thus, we have one 
additional fact: the manuscript was in the hands of another familiar at Rudolph's court at some time during the period from 
1608 to 1622. 

The last bit of concrete evidence we have is the place where the manuscript was found bv Voynich in 1912. this source 
was kept secret for some years, in the expectation chat Vovnich might wish to return and purchase more manuscripts there It 
was ultimate! v revealed to be the Villa Mondragonc, in Italy not far from Rome. The following is a precis of information 
concerning Mondragone. gathered bv John Tiltman: 

■A villa in Fraurau near Rome, buih bv Cardinal Aliemps jboui 1570, In I Pope Oregon Kill nued from Mtmdrairune the 
bulJ reforming the calendar. The villa apparently continued in the AUempi tamih. at in U&gt;2() j Urer member Deque jtned the Mimdratfime 
library to the Vatican Ltbrarv In 1B65 rhe vilL became a Jcimi College which iinallv Joscd in 1 Tdcmjr l^od, p 2 


1 


This. then, is all we realfv know for certain about the enigmatic codex: what observant students have seen in the book 
itself, acid the letter that accompanied it when found. (So far as I can discover, no scientific study of anv kind has ever been 
carried out on the inks, pigments, or parchment; and no attempt has been made to examine rhe pages under special light for 
hidden writing.) Upon this meagre foundation of fact, an imposing edifice of deduction and guesswork has been erected 
through creative research and persistent scholarship, first by Wilfrid Voynich, and then by a succession of larer students. 
Later sections of this paper will deal in fuller detail with that conjectures, manv of which seem well founded and of certain 
value ro future students of the manuscript. 

L2 The Knoum History of the Manuscript 

A set of solid bench marks can be assembled from the sources described above, and summarized as follows: 

The manuscript was in the hands of some unknown person who brought ir ro Rudolph's court some time before 1608. 

It was in the possession of Jacobus de Tepenecz for some time after 1608 and before his death in 1622. 

It was held for some time by another person, unidentified, who willed it to Joannus Marcus Marci sometime before 1665 
or 1666. 

ft was sent by Mara from Prague, during 1665 or 1 666. ro his old teacher. Athanasius Kirrher. in Rome. 

It did not tfr n reenter recorded history until it was discovered bv Wilfrid Voynich at the Villa Mondrasrone. Frascati, 
lealv in 1912. 

After the death of Vovtuch m 1930. the manuscript remained in the estate of his widow (author of a well-known novel. 
Tbt Gadfly, which enjoyed great popularity in the Soviet Union). Mrs. Vovnich died in July I960. Miss A M Nill. a dose 
friend and companion of Mrs. Voynich over many years, was co-owner of the manuscript 

It was purchased on July 12* 1961. by Hans P Kraus, New York antiquarian bookseller, for 524,500 

Kraus valued the manuscript at $ 100,000, and later at 5 1 60,000; he tried repeatedly to find a buyer for it at those prices 
Finally, in 1960. he presented it to the Bcinecke Rare Book Library of Yale University, where it now remains, catalogued as 
manuscript 408, and valued at $125,000 ro $500,000. according to different sources. (Information concerning the modern 
history of the manuscript was obtained from Tiltman 1968 and from unpublished notes kept bv Miss Nill for herself a nd for 
Mr. and Mrs. Voynich J 


Chapter 2 

Avenues of Attack on the Problem: A Survey 

In this chapter 1 will attempt to cover as much as possible of the great variety of conjecture, reasoning, research, and 
investigation chat has been carried out by a wide range of scholars, from Voynich down to rhose of recent sears. 1 have 
arranged this material under a selection of topics relating to important characteristics of the manuscript, tits provenience, 
date, original language, authorship. etc.L which have excited the curiosity and exercised the ingenuitv of all its manv 
students. I can lay claim to a knowledge of only a small part of the work that mav now be in progress or that mav have been 
done in the recent past; many people have undoubtedly carried on their work alone, and their ideas and results have become 
known only to their immediate colleagues and* acquaintances. Anv dav now. a new announcement of success could break 
upon the world from one of these students. 1 hope that the present summary, however incomplete, mav serve to cather 
together more information about (he manuscript and its researchers than has hitherto been available in one place. 

2J Conjectures Concerning the History of the Manuscript 

Soon after his discoverv of the manuscript, Vovmth undertook j verv competent und thorough investigation it&gt; In 'tor* 
He turned up a wealth of interesting data, and succeeded in piecing together a plausible sequence of events to fill in most of 
the blank spots between the known benchmarks. He traced che origin of the manuscript to Roger Bacon 1 1 21 4. ; - 1 292 ? ), a 
learned Franciscan scholar and philosopher, renowned in later times for his occult powers. Of Roger Bacon much more will 
be said below (see Sections 2,2.2* 3.1 and Chapter 7), Voynich stated that he had fastened upon Bacon as the most likelv 
candidate for authorship by a process of elimination, assuming, as he did. a thirteenth cemurv date for the manuscript even 
before he saw the letter from Marci mentioning che similar belief held by someone at the court of Rudolph II Vovmch s 
statement of his reasoning while examining the manuscript at the castle where he found it is worth quoting m full. 

Evtn a nett'Uirih' brifl nifniiuiiiin til che velium upon which tt wai written, the callifriphi. the drawing wnd (he pjirmems fun; treated n* 
me u the date of in origin the Utter part of the thirteenth tenturv The drjwingi indicated n tn be -in rncvrlupedu work urt ruiur.il phdm 
ophv. 1 tosuJv cunudereo the question of puuibk. authorship of the work ind the mmci of onh two thirteenth centwrt scfHtfan whi» imuUj 
have written un such i vanetv of utbiem occurred to me: first, Albertus MagfiLts. whom t at once eliminated from u mu deration btuuit 
hu ccciesiajtica] and political pminon was such chat it could not have been neceuirv for hi tn to conceal anv of hn wratnes to cipher, anc 
second I v. the Franciscan Friar, ftoprtr Bacon, an infinite iv greater scholar, who had been persecuted on account of his writing* jnu whose 
scientific discover'd had been mtvepresented as black magic. Moreover, for mans rears he had been forbidden bi his order to write 
and he himjcif referred in his works to the ncceuirv of hidmje his great secrets in cipher | 1021 . pp 4 L 16, j 

Vovmch continues, relating his discovery of the Marri letter as follows: 

It was not until some omc after the manuscript came into mv hands chic 1 read che document bearing che dice 166^ &lt;or iWfo-. which 
was attached to the front cover. Because of tts Uie due l had regarded it at of no consequence, a no therefore neglected n durinc the first 
examination of che rninuscnpt ‘ |P 416.| 

He must have been gratified indeed to find his conjectural attribution of the manuscript to Bacon thus dramatically 
corroborated. 

Next. Vovmch turned his attention to teasing as much additional information as he could from the fans at his disposal. He 
uncovered a quantity of fascinating detail concerning the personages mentioned in the letter and otherwise suspected to have 
been associated with the manuscript, many of them familiars of Rudolph 11 and members of his court. The subject of 
Rudolph, the scientific and pseudo- scientific movements that grew up around him* and the astonishing flock of scientists, 
spies, charlatans, and other flamboyant personalities that converged upon Prague during Rudolph's reign, is In itself a 
valuable area for study. The work published on this topic by Bolton (1904) is quite out of date, and while enjoyable reading, 
fails to do justice to the subject in the light of today's scholarship. Evans (1973) provides a detailed, up-to-date presentation 
on Rudolph and the elaborate and interesting culture surrounding hts court. Evans makes a untaiiiingiv brief mention of the 
Voynich manuscript, but docs not add anything to our knowledge of its origin. 

Here, in brief, is my chronological outline of the hypotheses Voynich put forward to fill the gaps tn the known hisiorr of" 
the manuscript, and to suggest further lines of investigation to complete the picture (all information m the outline below is 
from Vovmch 1921). 


3 


Latter half of the thirteenth centurv. The manuscript was penned by Roger Bacon, as a record of his secret discoveries of 
sctence or magic. 

— 1538.' The manuscript rested in some monastic library m England until the dissolution of the religious houses at the 
time of the Reformation; this destruction began in 1538. 

— 1547? Many Bacon manuscripts (some say mi many as 1200 all told) were collected bv Dr. John Dee, Elizabethan 
mathematician and astrologer (of whom more will be said below in Chapter 8) He obtained these. Voynich suggests, 
through his association with John Dudley. Duke of Northumberland, who amassed a large fortune through the rapacious 
spoliation of religious houses during the Reformation. Our manuscript could have come into Dee's hands as earlv as 1547. 
according to Vovnich. While it was in Dee s possession, he made vigorous attempts to decipher it. as attested bv a remark in 
a much later letter (dated 1675) quoting Arthur Dee. John Dee's son. to the effect that he had seen his father spending 
much time over a book “all in hieroglyphicks" (on this matter, see also Section 8.9 below), 

1584-1586. John Dec, failing in his attempts to decipher it. carried the manuscript to Prague on one of his visits to 
Rudolph's court between 1584 and 1588. It was, then, to Dee or someone representing him that Rudolph paid the 600 
ducats which was his price for the manuscript. It was probably also Dec who convinced Rudolph or others at the court of 
Roger Bacon's authorship; Dee was to a considerable degree obsessed with Bacon throughout a large portion of his life, and 
had a large pan in disseminating knowledge of Bacons work and refurbishing the reputation of the thirteenth* centurv friar, 
condemned bv tht Church and his contemporaries to centuries of neglect. Dee even claimed to be a descendant of Bacon 
(whose real name. Dee claimed, had been “David Dee" and nor Roger Bacon at all). 

—*1608? Rudolph made various artempts to get the manuscript decrypted by his stable of scholars and experts. In this 
endeavor, he may have committed the manuscript, for working purposes, into the keeping of Jacobus de Tepenen. whose 
name was written on it, and who may have kept it after Rudolph’s abdication in 161 L and the subsequent looting and 
dissolution of the Emperor s extensive museum and collections. Since de T e pc n ecz was ennobled in 1608, he could not have 
written his name on the manuscript in the form we see before that date. 

— 1622. de Tepenea died in 1622, and we have no evidence for the history of the manuscript between that time and its 
appearance in the hands of its next known owner, Marri 

— 1644? According to the Marri letter, the manuscript was in the possession of an unknown owner, mutual friend of 
Marci and Kircher. for some unknown period; indeed, it may have passed through several hands during that time. It muse 
have come into Marri's possession sometime before 1644, since Marri was able to discuss it with Dr, Raphael, who died m 
that vear. Voynich suggests fp 419) that "research into the Bohemian State Archives will lead to the discovery of the 
intimate friend of Marri and also of Kircher who had the manuscript between 1622 and 1 644. 

— 1665/6. During the time between 1644 and 1665 or 1666. we are reasonably certain that the manuscript was in the 
possession of Joannus Marcus Mara, and that it then passed into the hands of Athanasius Kircher. What Marci and Kircher 
did with it while thev had it. we do not know. 

— 1912. Vovnich savs, “mv own impression is that Kircher left the manuscript to someone at the court of Parma, where 
he had patrons and friends, and it probably remained in the possession of a member of the Farnese family until, with other 
manuscripts, it was removed to the collection in which 1 found it."' (p, 430.) 

Later researchers have added only a few details to this chronology so ingeniously ferreted out by Voynich. Brumbaugh 
(1975, p, 347) suggests that Kircher himself may have deposited the manuscript directly into the Villa at Mondragotic. 
John Manly (1921b, p. 188) claims that “it is dear that Marri did not possess the manuscript in 1640. when he was with 
Kircher in Rome", since he would naturally have given it to Kircher then. He alio reports that Marri, in the preface of a 
work entitled “Idearum Operatirium Idea", mentions as his mother-in-law one Laura, daughter of Dionisius Misserone. 
who became director of Rudolph’ s Imperial Museum. Manly implies that Misserone could have been the unknown friend 
who bequeathed the manuscript to Marri. Finally. Manly provides the interesting bit of information that the 600 ducats. 
Rudolph's payment for the manuscript, would be the equivalent of $14,000 in 1921. and he contributes some new dau 
regarding de Tepenecz: this scientist was obliged to flee the country during disturbances that took place in 1618, and may 
well have parted with the manuscript then, since it apparently remained in Prague. 

Robert Steele, an eminent historian and Baconian scholar who has edited many of Roger Baton s works (Bacon 
1909-1940), concurs with Voynich in connecting the manuscript with John Dee. He says, “Mr. Voynich is, we believe, 
right in his conjecture that it was sold by Dee to the Emperor Rudolph at the close of the six te e n th century, attributing it to 
Roger Bacon, and that it was probably the book containing nothing but hieroglyphics' of which Dee's son spoke to Sir 
Thos. Browne * (Steele 1928b, p 563.) 


4 


2.2 Authorship and Purpose 

2*2,1 A Hoax, a Forgery, or Nonsense* 

Mary students have had, at times, an uncomfortable suspicion that the mysterious codex upon which so much fruitless 
effort had been spent might be a fabrication, its teat representing nothing meaningful or orderly enough to be capable ot 
decipherment and transit non Wilfrid Voynich seems to have felt that the manuscript was unquestionably a genuine 
production of a thirteenth -century author, and specifically of Roger Bacon. Dr. Albert H. Carter (one time technical 
historian of the Armv Security Agency) states the opinion shared bv most students who have grappled with the elegant puzzle 
when he says. 'So much time and so much expense in vellum of excellent qualiry went into it. it cannot be a hoax. It is 
conceivably the work of a wealthy and learned, if deranged* person, but not a hoax” f 1946, p. I ). In an earlv report. John 
Tiltman, one of the most faithful and thoroughgoing of the manuscript s students, expresses his considered confidence in its 
authenticity: "I do not believe the manuscript is completely meaningless, the ravings or doodlings ol a lunatic, nor do 1 
believe it is just a hoax — it is too elaborate and consistent for either. , . , About the worst thmg it can be is a deliberate 
forgery for gain. . . , I regard this as rather improbable- -.V &lt;195 1 , p. 1 h 

In a more recent presentation, Tiltman reiterates these judgements, refusing to accept suggestions that the manuscript 
contains only “meaningless doodlings". He continues* "There is more sense to the idea that the work is a forgerv. This I 
think is highly unlikely* especially if Captain Currier's ideas are correct " (Tiltman 1975 ; the reference to Captain Currier 
concern? his findings of multiple "hands” in the text, for which see Section 6.8 below. ) Erwin Panofskv. a prominent scholar 
of medirval and Renaissance studies, added ihe weight of bis learning to this view: 1 should like to reiterate mv opinion 

that the Voynich manuscript, whichever its place of origin, date and purpose, is certainly a perfectly authentic document 
(1954. p 3). Finally, Elizabeth Fnedman, wife of William Friedman (prominent crvptologist and student of the 
manuscript) and a distinguished scholar and cryptologist in her own right, expresses a similar opinion: All scholars 

competent to judge the manuscript . . . were — and still are — agreed that it is definitely not a hoax or the doodlings of a 
psychotic but is a homogeneous, creative work of a serious scholar who had something to convey " ( 1962 1. 

At least one recent researcher has spoken out in favor of an opposing view, stadng that the manuscript is in fact a forgerv, 
and may contain a considerable quantity of meaningless "dummy" text intended merely to fill it out to an impressive length 
Robert Brumbaugh (1974, 1975, 1976) claims that the book was expressly and calculatedlv designed bv some sixteenth- 
century opportunist in order to fool the Emperor Rudolph into parting with the large sum of monev that he did. indeed 
spend to obtain it. To this end, the text was provided with a wealth of apparently easy ''keys", and just enough easilv deci- 
pherable material on the last page to convince Rudolph's experts that it would prove to be readable with the expenditure of 
a reasonable amount of effort. Faked "evidence" was also planted on the last page, according to Brumbaugh, to associate the 
secret book closely to Roger Bacon — that exciting and mysterious possessor of impressive scientific and occult powers in 
whom John Dee had been busilv raising interest to a fevered pitch at Rudolph's court. 

In spite of all this, Brumbaugh shares the view that the manuscript is not totally meaningless. He says, "There is an 
underlying text . . , and sooner or later, by collaborative work* it will be read. There is no way of predicting what it will sav: 
it could be anything from a standard botany textbook to formulae for the Elixir of Life deriving from Roger Bacon" ( 1975. 
p. 354). Father Theodore C. Petersen, another dedicated long-term student of the manuscript who possessed a wide 
background of learning in hiitory and philology, expresses his view thus: "There is agreement that the text of the Vovmrh 
manuscript obeys uniform rules which are constant and unchanging throughout the whole 246 extant quarto pages of 
writing — indicating that the script contained an intelligible meaning for its writer" (1953. 1 )- 

Newbold, Feely, and Strong, the three other principal claimants (besides Brumbaugh) to some degree of success m 
deciphering the manuscript, all accepted it as a genuine and serious production either of the thirteenth or the sixteenth 
ccnturv. William Friedman also, while not to my knowledge associating the manuscript with anv specific author, regarded it 
as a valid document with some content capable of being deciphered and read. 

Some students of the manuscript, and others who disclaim any interest in it, have advanced the view char its content can 
have no value for science or for the study of human thought. Tiltman. in his early report to Friedman, says. "I do not in anv 
case imagine there is anything historically or scientifically important contained in the manuscript" (195 1, p. 1 I: this, in spite 
of his deep and long -continued interest in the problem and his firm rejection of the theory that the manuscript is completely 
meaningless or fraudulent. Elizebeth Friedman indicates that the lack of serious interest in the manuscript on the part of 
scholars was. on at least one occasion, a cause of disappointment to her husband in his research: "‘It appears to be gibberish to 
many serious- minded academics, who are apt to scoff at the idea that its solution would be of anv value to science or 
learning — as did a great foundation to which Friedman once applied for a grant for the detailed study of the manuscript. In 
the opinion of the board, a solution would not advance human knowledge. The manuscript probably contains only trivia, the 
board said." ( 1962) 

5 


J must confess that J cm see link justice m the reasoning of those academics' who dismiss the Vovnich manuscnpi out of 
hand, after what cm onlv be the most superficial attention , Even if it is. in fact, a fabrication associated with the court ot 
Rudolph 11. an under standing of who wrote it. its passage from one to another of Rudolph s familiars, and the part it plaved 
tn the remarkable congeries of religious and political aco vines at Prague in those omes could prove to be of great interest In 
the history of thought, it is not the intrinsic importance of a work that matters so much as its place within a larger pattern of 
events and meanings. If the manuscript is a compilation, however "deranged" or idiosyncratic, drawn from earlier magical, 
alchemical, or medical works, it his at least as much intrinsic interest and "scientific'' import for the history of Western 
thought as do other similar manuscripts which are readable, and concern onlv one topic (i.c.. they are either astrological. or 
alchemical, or medical). Reputable scholars apparently see no wane of a me m studying plaintext manuscripts of this tvpe. 
and mav spend much of their lives so occupied 

The Vovnich manuscript appears to be unusual in that n combines in one book at least four differrni medieval disciplines, 
apparently with some attempt to integrate them into a single system. If read, it could provide a highly interesting picture of a 
theory or doctrine interrelating all these disaplines, at least in the beliefs or practices of one individual or school. Finally* 
even if the text is totally meaningless (a possibility that seems to me highly unlikely), a decipherment of the text in some 
manner per mining an understanding of the code, cipher, or other concealment system employed should be of great interest 
for the history of crrptology. and perhaps also for the stud? of alphabets and writing interns. In summary. 1 could accept a 
finding that the manuscript was a hoax or a forgery: I might also accept the presence of a Large amount of dummv or tiller 
text, to pad out the length of the document or to act as "cover'' text within which a shorter message is hidden. I cannot, 
however, see anv justification for dismissal of the manuscript as trivial or unworthy of careful and svstemaric study We can 
assess its value for human knowledge onlv efier we have read it. or at least learned quite a lot more about it. 

2.2.2 Who Wrote It, and Why? 

Roger Bacon (A.D. 12I4/-1292/) as Author. Voynich, as we have seen above, was certain of Bacon's authorship from 
the outlet. His reasoning, presented above (Section 2.1) need not be recapitulated here. William R. Newbold, the first would 
be decipher ol the secret book, maintained chat Bacon wrote it. as a diary of novel scientific researches unacceptable to the 
Church. He intended the book, according to NewboJd. for his favorite pupil John, or for some other dimple or friend, 
providing the recipient with an oral key subsequently lost The first chapter of the book describing New bold s findings 
presents an excellent sketch of Roger Bacon's life, writings, and thought, indicating that he had made a thorough study of 
the thirteenth -century friar and his works f 1928. pp. 1-28). J. Malcolm Bird (1921 J accepts Newbold's decipherment. and 
the attribution to Bacon, in favor of which he provides a lengthy justification. 

At least two other objective and painstaking researchers agree that there is no conclusive evidence against the original 
authorship of the manuscript bv Bacon (whether it is in his autograph hand or represents a later copy of his work i. John M 
Manly (prominent literary scholar who later refitted Newbold's solution) expressed his opinion thus in an earlv comment: 
"That the manuscnpi is Bacon s. or even that it dates from the thirteenth century, cannot then be proven bv documentary 
evidence, but there is no evidence against this tradition, and the appearance of the manuscript itself confirms it. . /* f 1921. p. 
189). Tikman concurs with this view: "There is as yet no solid evidence that the manuscript is not by Roger Bacon, or a 
copy of a work by him" (1968, p. 13). A number of prominent Baconian scholars accepted, indeed hailed with enthusiasm. 
Newbold's claim to have proven that Bacon was the aurhor (Canon 1929; Gilson 1928), For further discussion of this 
question, see Chapter 7 below. 

Roger Bacon Not the Author. Others are just emphatic in their rejection of Bacon either as the scribe or contributor of 
anv comem in the manuscript. The objections of some revolve around their rejection of an earlv date for the book, and their 
apparent unwillingness to consider it as a later copy of Bacon s work. They ate opinions of experts dating the manuscnpi 
around J 300. and therefore much too late to have been a work by Bacon, or even likely to have been a copy f most copies of 
Bacon's works that have come down to us were made m the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries). Still others repea Baconian 
authorship not. apparently, in general, but specifically as a pan of their emphatic rejection of Newbold's decipherment and 
his attribution of the manuscript to Bacon, along with such impossibly anachronistic activities as the invention of the 
compound microscope and telescope, and their use to observe events within a frame of reference completely foreign to 
Bacon's times. Erwin Panofrky has slated flatly that "The Roger Bacon theory is in mv opinion at variance with all the 
available facts and has been convincingly disproved bv Mr. Manly" (i.e„ in Manlv's articles demolishing New-bold' s 
theories) ( 1954. p. 2). Dr. Charles Singer, eminent historian of science, said in a letter to Tikman ( 12 November. 1957 ). I 
came to the conclusion that all suggestion of a knowledge of the microscope [again referring to New bold s decipher merit j 


6 


was simph nonsense " Final I v. Lvnn Thorndike has. with characteristic emphasis, stated his opinion that There is hardh 
one chance in fifty char Roger Bacon had anv connection wirh the production of the Vovruch manuscript. ' i 1 929. p. 5 1 9i. 

Anthony Askham as Author. Dr. Leondl C Strong (whose claims to a decipherment of the manuscript are discussed in 
Section 5.} bebw). insisted that the author was a sixteen di-century physician named Anthonv Askham for Ascham), who 
had published several almanacs, astrological works, and an herbal. (Tiltman has ferreted out references to a number of these, 
as early printed books: see Askham I34Ba, 1548b, 1530. 1552, and 1553J Strong claimed, further, to have deciphered 
Askham s name on folio 93 of the manuscript No other student has accepted this theory, and Strong s proposed readings ol 
the text have been emphatically re jeered 

Other General Suggestions Regarding Authorship. Dr. Carter claimed id see evidence of "a copvist at work - ' 1 1046. p 
1 h He mentions duplication among the zodiac diagrams, there being in fact two leaves showing the Ram, Aries, and two 
showing the Bull, Taurus, (These diagrams are, in actuality quite different when examined carefully, and the apparent 
' duplications" arc onlv superficial; the pairing of diagrams for these two zodiac signs clearlv had some definite purpose 
known only to the author of the manuscript J Xh. Singer, in a letter to Tiltman f 1 2 November, 19571 expresses the opinion 
that the origin of rhe manuscript was somehow related to Rudolph's court and to John Dee. While he does nor tun her 
specify the nature of the connection, one gains the impression that he may have had in mind an idea similar to Brumbaugh * 
discussed above. Panofskv states the following view; "Mv idea always was that the manuscript was written bv a doctor or 
quack trying to impart what he considered secret knowledge to his son or heir" 1 1954. p 21, 

2.3 Provenience and Underlying Language 

England. Medieval Latin. Voynich, as we have seen* traced the manuscript to Roger Bacon, in the England of the late 
thirteenth century. He probably also, therefore, assumed the underlying '‘plaintext" to be the medieval Latin of the Schools, 
used by Bacon in all his surviving works. Newbold (1928, p. 44) also gives the manuscript an English origin, claiming to rest 
his opinion on “the judgement of experts" not further identified, based on the parchment, ink and style of the drawings. His 
proposed decipherment produced a form of medieval Latin. The language which Feely fl 94 3 ) claimed to have discovered m 
the manuscript was also Latin, but in a system of abbreviated forms not considered acceptable bv other scholars, who 
unanimously rejected his readings of the text 

England. Medieval English. Leonetl Strong (1945) maintained that he had deciphered rhe text as medieval English, as 
we will see in Section 5*3 below, other students have rejected his theory and the plaintext he produced, both as valid 
medieval English and as a correct decipherment of the Voynich text. 

Unspecified European, Latin. Elizebeth Friedman ( 1962) states that her husband, William Friedman, agreed with other 
qualified experts that “the country of origin is definitely European; it might be England, France, Italy, or what is now 
Germanv." She adds, further, that "the text is based upon a written language that is probably Latin, the language of all 
learned and scientific discourses of that period, but may be medieval English, French. Italian, or Teutonic, " These views 
seem to Leave us with a discouragingly wide choice, indicating that the ' experts" could fix upon no definite evidence to 
narrow the area of their search. 

Italy. Hellmur Lehmann-Haupt. Bibliographical Consultant to H. P, Kraus (owner of the manuscript between 1962 and 
1969), suggested in a letter to John Tiltman dated I November, 1963 that Italy was a likely country of origin. He states. 
"While both palcographicaJly and historically speaking, Italy is as likely i place of origin as any other country of Europe, 
there is no evidence that the manuscript must have been made in Venice, or elsewhere in Northern Italy. The possibility that 
it comes from Central or Southern Italy is soil open, and this could very well mean exposure to the Arab world. " He proposes 
that Arabic should be considered as a candidate for the underlying language. Robert Steele suggests that some of the writing 
on the last page may be "perhaps in a North Italian hand" (1928b, p. 564). Brumbaugh draws evidence from details in 
some of the drawings for his theory of a relatively late date and a European provenience. Thus, in one of the zodiac- like 
circular diagrams, he says "Sagittarius wears a Eft tenth -century Florentine archer s hat in his medallion (though it is 
retouched over the month name)" (1975. p. 349). 

Germany or Eastern Europe. Charles Singer, in a letter to Tiltman dated 12 November, 1957, states hts feeling that the 
manuscript is "of Germanic origin", and "connected with John Dee and that sort of movement. " He gives a somewhat fuller 
statement of this view in another letter to Dr. G. M. J. Flemming, undated but obviously written at about the same time: 
‘The judgement that I formed upon the manuscript was that it was of the sixteenth century, of South German work and 
possibly related to Prague and John Dee." Singer also suggests that Czech. Polish, or some other East-Central European 


I 


language should be considered to underlie the teat. Fortunately for students of the manuscripts, whose difficulties are already 
sufficient! v burdensome, he considers Magyar "highlv unlikely." 

Doth Singer (in the letter to Flemming) and Panofsky (1954. p. 2), mention a reading of some scattered phrases on the 
Last page as High German; this reading was proposed, apparently in a private communication, bv Richard Salomon of 
Kenyon College. Dr. Salomon suggests that a portion of the text in a mixture of scripts should be read: so mm gcismi [ L | ch 
o ', representing a medieval prescription meaning "(If such and such a condition prevails), then take goat s milk or 
This ’"prescription”, which breaks off in mid -sentence, Salomon sees as continuous with the preceding text on the line He 
suggests an interpretation in German also for the brief words found on folio 66t. near a figure of a man Iving on his back as 
if sick or dead, and surrounded by several ambiguous objects. He reads the text as "der muisteiJ", referring to the obligators- 
endowment of a widow with household goods on her husband s death. 

2.4 Date of Origin 

Thirteenth or Fourteenth Centurv. Voynich (1921, p 415) assigned the manuscript to the latter half of the thirteenth 
century, as we have seen above. New bold stated thar in the judgement of experts.” a study of parchment, ink. and style of 
drawings placed the manuscript in die thirteenth century. (1928. p. 44). Petersen says, "T agree with Mr, Tiltman that the 
juxtaposition of a herbal with (he kind of astrological tables found here indicates a fairly early due for the manuscript. The 
thirteenth centurv manuscripts of St. Hildegardt of Bingen show drawings illustrating the influence of the heaven l v bodies 
and elementary celestial forces upon the vegetative and animate life of the earth. The fourteenth centurv manuscript Vatican 
1906 has somewhat similar astronomical drawings' (1955, p 2). Steele provides the following interesting comments, with 
the benefit of his expen knowledge and personal familiarity with medieval manuscripts (and in particular the works of Roger 
Bacon): 'The usual methods of dating a manuscript (mil us. the writing cannot be placed, the vellum is coarse for the 
thirteenth century, but not impossible, the ink is good. Only the drawings remain, and owing to their complete absence of 
style the difficulty of dating is but increased. It is strange that the draftsman should have so completely escaped all medieval 
or Renaissance influence" (1928b, p. 565). 

Fifteenth Century. Hugh O'Neill, a prominent American botanist, published an identification of certain plant drawings as 
New World species: "The most startling identification. . was folio 93. which is quite plainly the common sunflower. 
Helianthus Annuus L. Six botanists have agreed with me on this deter nu nation. This immediately recalls the dace 1493. 
when the seeds of this plant were brought to Europe for the first time (by Columbus on his return from his second vovage). 
Again folio 10 Iv shows a drawing which does not resemble any native European fruit, but suggests plainly Capsicum, a 
genus strictly American in origin, known in Europe onlv after the above date. . , . It seems necessary to consider this 
manuscript as having been wrinen after 1493” (1944. p. 126) Other scholars, however, completely revert O'Neill's 
.identification of the sunflower and p ep p er plant, and ire as emphatic in their claim that none of the plants pictured in the 
manuscript are of New World origin. Helmut Lehmann- Haupt (bibliographical consultant to H. P. Kraus J stated in a letter 
to Tiltman dated l November. 1963, that "there is a near agreement on the date of the CIPHER manuscript as around, or a 
little after, the vear l40G." 

Sixteenth Century. Panofsky adds his voice to these suggesting a late date for the origin of the mysterious codex: ‘Were it 
not for the sunflower [as identified by O'Neill] . . .1 should have thought that it was executed a little earlier, sav about 1470. 
However, since the style of the drawings is fairly provincial, a somewhat later date, even the first years of the sixteenth 
century, would not seem to be excluded. I should not go lower than ea. 151 0—1320 because no influence of the Italian 
Renaissance style is evident. The above date is based on the character of the script, the style of drawing and on such costumes 
as are in evidence on certain pages, for example folio 72 recto | probably referring to the costumes in the Gemini 
representations]." (1954. p. 1). Eliaebeth Friedman states the consensus of expert opinion at the time as follows. 
"Paleographic experts agree that the nature of the drawings, the writing, the ink and vellum, etc., indicate that the 
manuscript is certainly of later origin than the thirteenth century. The female figures, for example, are not the angular forms 
characteristic of that period but are of a later, rotund, period. Some experts suggest that the probable period in which it was 
wrinen was 1500, plus or minus twenty years" (1962), 

A. H. Carter reports the similar judgement of Miss Nil! (a friend of Mrs. Voynich who accompanied him when he 
examined the manuscript in (1946): "The style of the drawings, especially the conventions of the line drawings in the 
women, suggest to Miss Nili, quite properly, that the manuscript is far later than the thirteenth or fourteenth centuries. 
There is nothing Gothic' or angular about them. They are fac and rotund and suggest in their style the influence of the 


8 


realism of a later period. The coloring of the illustrations may well support a Uter date than the thirteenth century' t 1946. 

P-»- 

Among those agreeing on a sixteenth * century date for the manuscript is Dr. Charles Singer, who states in his letter to John 
Tillman (12 November. 1957), "The date of the manuscript would* in my opinion* be somewhere in the neighborhood of 
1320 or perhaps a little later. . . We hive already seen that he connects the origin of the manuscript with John Dee and 
Prague. Leonell Strong makes an interesting suggestion, that "The format and use of certain peculiar symbols (mirror images 
of the Italian d or di and eh respectively) are evidences that the author was probably familiar with the manuscript of 
Leonardo da Vino's 'Anatomy' (written about 1510)" (1945. p. 608)* Strong’s identification of Anthonv Askham as 
author of the manuscript also leads him to place it in the sixteenth century, since Askham s known works were published 
from 1525 on. 

Robert Brumbaugh presents perhaps the most detailed and specific evidence for a sixteenth -century date: . .it seemed 

plain to me from the outset that this is not a thirteenth century 1 manuscript, and I doubted whether Rudolph II or anv of his 
experts ever had accepted it as an autograph. work by Roger Bacon. Detail after detail pointed to a later date closer to 1500 
than 1500. * , .Sagittarius wears a fifteenth -century Florentine archer s hat in his medallion (though it ts retouched over the 
month name). A clock, tucked away in folio 85 l has a short hour and long minute hand* a style not developed until rhe 
fifteenth century. . . Jn short, this manuscript is at earliest a compilation of about 1500" (1975. p. 349). (A number of the 
points Brumbaugh employs to bolster his argument depend upon his own decipherment and associated specific identifications 
of the symbols with numerals* etc.; I have omirted these, retaining only his more objectively based comments For further 
discussion of the "dock", see 33*6.) 

Finally, Jeffrey Krischer obtained, in the course of his research, the opinions of a number of experts at Harvard Umversin 
concerning the date and provenience of the manuscript (see Section 6.7). He reports their judgement as follows: 

Profeuor G iki Cwutibk (proftwr of medieval history, Harvard University), in looking over ph«o«aij of the manuscript, dated tht 
roamacTipi as jiateemh century and iuggemd thir the script might be a form of private lanftiage motivated by the desire to keep such j 
powerful document from the general public Science in this period represented: power and if one inumn the minuwrnpt u indeed destnbme 
plana and bdoficii and astrological phenomena, then dm line of reasoning u quite acceptable The date of the manutenpt was again placed 
in the sixteenth century by Mr Rodney Deimti (curator of manuscripts in Houghton Library of the Harvard College Library t Mr Defintt 
identified the script to be m the ttyle of the sixteenth century immtnjif script, Another dating of the manuscript «*s due to Dr franklin 
Laddert Dr Ludden determined the date « being m the period 1475 to 1 550 His mettiod of dating if based upon anal vim* the ttvle of the 
drawings; ihe features of the nude figures; the HvJiiation of the botanical drivings/ | Kmdier J 969. pp 5 1 -52. | 

In consideration of this review of many pronouncements made by scholars and experts, I have made a rough box score 
summarizing their opinions. Jc is crude* but it may aid the reader in bringing some order out of the multiplicity of 
judgements that have accumulated over the years during which the mysterious manuscript has been studied, in the tally 
shown below, I have arbitrarily assigned a score of "2" to such statements as "in the judgement of experts , or the 
consensus of opinion", and a score of " 1" to the opinion of a single writer, without attempting to weight them in anv greater 
detail* 

dates score 

1250-1399 5 

1400-1350 12 

To mv mind, this summary of expert opinion does, in fact, lend considerable weight to a relatively late date for the 
manuscript. 


9 


Chapter 3 

Avenues of Attack: The Drawings 

3. 1 Relationship of the Drawings to the Text 

If has been suggested bv some students* baffled and exasperated bv repeated, futile attempts to make sense out of the 
pictures as a wav of cribbing into the text* that there may be no necessary connection between the writing and the illustration 
on any given page. The pictures, some have proposed, may be a "blind”, introduced to mislead the would-be decipherer and 
further conceal some dangerous secrets of a totally different character Most serious students of the manuscript appear to be 
certain, however, that text and pictures were drawn together and form a related whole. Eiixebech Friedman states, for 
example. "There can be no question that the same scribe wrote the text and made the drawings, as anv handwriting expert 
would readily agree" { 1962). 

Dr. A, H, Carter concurs in the above opinion: "Because the same ink and the same kind of penstrokes appear in the 
illustrations and because the text forms an integral and unified pan of manv of the illustrations, it appears probable char the 
same pc son wrote the text and drew the illustrations" f 1946. p. 1). Tikman feels that we have a right to expect that the text 
belongs to the illustrations* "in the complete absence of evidence to the contrary" f 1968. p U ) . In the view of those w ho 
have studied the manuscript with care* the text seems to be intricately interwoven in and around the pictures in such a wav us 
to have rendered a dose collaboration necessary between scribe and draftsman if they were, in fact, different persons. In some 
cases, text strings are written on parts of pictures (for instance, as labels on the objects called "pharmaceutical jars” bv manv 
students in folios 99r and 102v2, and in the segment* and cells of the intricate diagrams on fohos 85-86 as well as manv 
astrological and cosmological drawings. 

3*2 Nature and Characteristics of the Drawings 

The impression made upon the modern viewer first coming upon a photocopv of the manuscript It he form rn which it has 
most frequently met the eye of students), is one of extreme oddity, quaineness, and foreignness — one might almost sav 
unearthliness. To the reader who has seen pictures of more typical illuminated medieval manuscripts, these pages look verv 
different indeed from what he expects to find m such a book. For me. at least, after working with the photocopv intensivdv 
for some weeks* the initial impression of ' 'queerness” lost its prominence and gave wav to other, more considered reactions 
which mav be summed up as follows: 

Homogencirv of Stvie. The drawings and text of the entire manuscript seem to me to form a consistent whole, the product 
of one school or group of closely related persons if not of a single person. 

Craftsmanship and Pragmatism. The scribe (or scribes) seems nor to have been motivated bv design or esthetic criteria anv 
more than bv what we. today, would consider realism. Manv of the plant folios and some cosmological designs i notably 9r, 
1 Iv, 16v. 33v* 41v* 49r, 68v2, 67 r 1 , 67r2, and 6Svl) present a stalwart, bold fehcitv of composition that is almost 
architectonic in its quality, and {to me) quite pleasing. The impression which I receive is emphatically one of craftsmanship 
rather than art. 

Structural Regularity. I gain a persistent impression of the presence of rules and relationships, a definite structure with its 
own "logic”* however erratic and bizarre it might appear when compared to prescm*dav concepts. The intricate compound 
forms in the script and its matter -of- fact, rather austere style all confirm this impression of craffsmanlike and logical 
construction in my mind. As 1 will try to show below, there appears to be a similar quality in the diagrams, as if 
conventionalized forms are used almost as symbols and combined to build up more complex symbolic statements. As a part of 
this quality of const ructed ness," there is a persistent tectonic element of style in the drawings, emphasizing three* 
dimensional forms* symmetry, and connectedness of parts. 

Idiosyncratic, Individual Quality. As has been noted by others, the manuscript seems to stand totally apart from all other 
even remotely comparable documents. No one. to mv knowledge, has so far discovered anvthmg else at all like it. ft strikes 
the viewer as a very strong and definite statement* completely independent of any known si vie or doctrine. It seems to be 
deliberate, designed production of an individual or a small group working alone. (This apparent isolation mar. of course, be 
due simply to our failure to discover the other documents or philosophies related to it, but it seems unlikely that no trace of 
such parallels would have been recognized bv the many eminent medieval and Renaissance scholars who have examined the 


11 


manuscript*. In Section 3-2-3 I will discuss some other manuscripts that have been mentioned as poisiblv comparable to the 
Voynich manuscript. 

The above ire my own impressions of the visual qualities of the manuscript; we will see bdow how some other students 
have reacted to it, 

3*2* / Provenience and Style 

Voynich communicates his impression of the contrast between this manuscript and the other, more tvpical medievil 
manuscripts wuh which it was found: "It was such an ugly duckling compared with the other manuscripts, with their rich 
decora Dons in gold and colon, that my interest was aroused at once " (1921. p. 413 k Dr Carter provides a detailed 
description of the man user: pi, with considerable emphasis on the draftsmanship, pigments, and srvle; his personal reaction is 
as follows: "The illustrations arc done with great care, not with attention to providing a pleasing picture but rather with 
attention to accuracy of detail. They arc, as Mns Mill pointed out. the kind of drawings that a scientist would make for 
himsdf. not illustrations designed to enhance the beauty of the book" f 1 946, p. Ik 

Students disagree to some extent on the quality of the drawings as accurate portrayals of their apparent subject matter 
There is also considerable disagreement in ot surprisingly) about their esthetic quality. To some, they are pleasing; to others, 
they seem clumsy, inept, and childish. An anonymous author in Scientific American takes a critical and contemptuous view 
"These pictures are crudely drawn in by a person who obviously was somewhat lacking in artistic abilirv. even lor a 
thirteenth -century scribe" (1921, p, 432)* Again, the same author expresses a similar opinion a few pages later: The senbe 
was not a great success as an artist, his efforts sometimes remind us of the crude outlines we produce m impressing upon a 
draftsman what we want and how we want it" (p 439). Charles Singer, in his letter to John Tilunan. 12 November 195", 
expresses a similar contempt for the represen cation* I and artistic quality of the plant pictures: "The figures of plants are not 
botanical at all but of the kind one makes when doodling or the children make of plants." 

As will also be noted in the discussion of the script bdow (4.1,1), while many students have briefly mentioned the style of 
the drawings as a factor in their judgements concerning the date and provenience of the manuscript, none of them provide 
any real faro to back up their remarks beyond a vague reference to "experts" not further identified- As we have seen above. 
Steele remarks, it is strange chat the draftsman should have so completely escaped all medieval and Renaissance influences 
(1928b, p, 563). Carter { 1946) refers to the "rotundity" of the human figures and the lack of "Gothic" style as evidence 
for a date later than the thirteenth or fourteenth centuries. Panofsky (1934. p, 1 ) assesses the srvle of the drawings as ' fairlv 
provincial" : he also states that there is no evidence of influence from the Italian Renaissance style. In sum. it appears as if no 
one has made or documented a really careful and systematic attempt to contrast and compare the style of the Vovmch 
manuscript drawings to other manuscripts of various origins and dates such as could answer some of our questions 

3*2*2 Pigments and Inks . 

Dr. Carter provides a detailed description of the pigments. This deserves to be quoted in full, in spite of us considerable 
length, since few students ever get to see the manuscript in any other form except black and white photocopies. 

Some of the colon appear to be colored ink or water color, tome a kind of era ton. and Kune an opaque kind of paint like potttt paint 
There are many colors, the ink i* pnd uroit brown, there it an amber. like ink. like Bfimh-tan leather floods: a bright, not quite brilliant 
blue mk or water cdor: an opaque aquamarine, a food stronje red. carmine rather thin scarlet or vermilliOA. a dirt* rellow [the tellow and 
browns of the sunflower illustration are like those , only a little faded, of the Van Gogh sunflower picture; the greens are ku bn llum i . a 
red that looks like a bloodstain about a week old: a dirty green: an opaque green, a kind of green ora eon. and arreral other greeiu of vinous 
huts. intetuitY. value, and feature, a red that looks like (set rouge in color and tenure; a thick red that makes docs of color that vou could 
scrape wtth wt finger nail; a red ink iust tike ordmarT red ink today, a blue that qsarkks wuh any fragments foot apparently by design; 

Some of the colon are flowed on as wrth a brush: so me have left pigment-borded contours at where a little pool had wood unbiortee 
Some mar have been blotted (with doth?! Some were applied with strokes of the quill, and tome were scrubbed into the vellum with a 
blunt quill which had become furry on the end U a wooden stylus does after r ep ea ted use." | Garter 1946, p. 2.| 


3.2*3 Relationships to Some Other Illustrated Manuscripts . 

My sources have disappointingly little to sav on chu topic. One gams the impression, whether justly or not, that the bizarre 
quality of the pictures and the difficulty of identifying with any certainty what they portray, has caused most scholars 
familiar with more conventional medieval manuscripts to throw up their hands in disgust after the most cursory glance The 
"herbal" pictures of complete plants and the astrological diagrams associated with recognizable zodiac figures offer perhaps 


12 


the most immediate promise tor comparisons ro other herbal or astrological drawings. Panofskv ( 19^-i, p l addresses the 
problem as follows: "Manuscripts in plain Language remote lv comparable to the Vovnich manuscript are, unfortunately of m 
least four kinds: first, herbals: second, cosmological and astrological treatises; third, medical treatises in the narrow sense of 
the term, fourth, possibly, treatises on alchemy," He suggests that the mystical drawings of a thirteenth -century monk. 
Opicmus de Canistris. may be worth examining as comparable astrological and cosmological works. Father Petersen t 1 97 3 . 
p. 2). mentions the visionary writings and drawings of St, Hildegarde of Bingen as possibly comparable, and he recommends 
the fourteenth -century Vatican manuscript 1906 as similar to some of the astronomical drawings, 

Tihman states his considered opinion: "To the best of mv knowledge no one has been able to find anr point of connection 
with am other medieval manuscript or early printed book. This h all the stranger because the range of writing and 
illustration on the subject of the plant world from the early Middle Ages right through into the sixteenth and even 
seventeenth centuries is verv limited indeed" i 1968. p. Ill, Elizebech Friedman expresses her own and William Friedman s 
views when she states flativ, "So far as is known, there is no , . . kev or crib," ( 19621 (For those unfamiliar with the term as 
used bv cryptanalysts, a "crib " is a parallel or comparable text in a known language that can be used to break into an 
unknown text as the three parallel inscriptions in different scripts on the Rosetta Stone were employed in the decipherment of 
Egyptian hieroglyphs. A crib can also take the form of a guess as to the subjen matter, or individual words that might be 
found at certain places in an unknown text, 1 

Opicmus de Camstris lA.D. 1296-ca 1336). R Salomon i 1936) describes the visionarv and mystical drawings of this 
monk an shows extensive illustrations of them. Born in Pavia, Italy. Opicmus had a difficult and unhappy life, he idl and 
injured his head as a child, a mishap which mav have had a central part in the later episode of illness and visions w hich he 
recorded in the remarkable book of drawings studied bv Salomon. The draftsmanship is verv delicate and beautiful, with an 
artistic quality totally different from that of the Vovnich manuscript. The designs are extreme! v dense and intricate, with 
manv concentric circles, intersecting arcs and lines, and bands densely packed with tmv sets of numbers and letters. Manv of 
them show careful! v -drawn human figures with well-drafted maps of the world and other, smaller human figures inside 
them or interlocking with their outlines. 

Maps and architectural plans are a prominent feature of Opirinus' productions, as are Biblical symbols such as animals 
standing for the Four Gospels, and the signs of the zodiac One drawing shows his entire autobiography, from his birth up to 
the year l 335 or 1336 (when he drew the pictures), all packed onto one page. They are all cioselv overwritten with Latin 
text, in verv tmv. near letters: the text is primarily about Opicmus himself (his feelings, his sinfulness and unworthiness, 
events in his life, etc,) represented in symbolic wavs interwoven with religious symbolism and quotations from the Bible and 
patristic writings The onlv real similarity to the Vovnich manuscript drawings is the encyclopedic quality, in combining so 
manv disparate elements symbolically within a structural and semantic unit. The appearance and srvle of Opicmus 
productions are totally at variance with these of our manuscript: Opicmus was a trained artist and draftsman, and had 
produced an earlier book of beautiful architectural drawings of his native town. Pavia, as well as a number of devotional 
religious Tracts. 

St. Hildegarde de Bingen f A.D, 1098-1 179). St. Hildegarde. abbess of a convenr in Germany, was gifted w ith pow ers of 
propheev and mystical vision. She produced several books describing and illustrating these visions, as well as a book about the 
causes and cures of disease. Her drawings appear considerably more like those in our manuscript on the face of it; thev are 
relatively provincial and crude." and have none of the delicacy and professional quality of Opicmus' drawings 
Hildegarde s drawings have some of the same symbolic, "constructed" quality as those in the Vovnich manuscript. Thev 
show rather different elements of content, however: animal heads and recognizable figures of Christ and the Virgin, for 
example. Some of the drawings appear ro have banks of ravs, clouds, or flames similar to those on some Vovnich manuscript 
folios. 

There rs little or no text or labelling within anv of the illustrations I have seen of Hildegarde s works: their mean me is 
explicated in connected ten elsewhere in the books. Their symbolism, as explained there, is entirely Biblical and Christian u 
sun dike ball of flame represents Christ s burning love: three smaller stars above it are the T rimer; heads spouting vapors are 
people preaching the Gospel or using words to do the work of the devil, etc.). The designs have a highly symmetrical, 
abstract quality similar to many Vovnich pictures, and some have similar arrangements of small cells or radiating lines in 
bands around a circle. It is amusing to note, after all the pontifical ions of experts about rotund figures and the absence of 
Gothic sttrle in the Vovnich manuscript, that Hildegarde s twelfth -century human figures are well -filled -out, vivacious, 
plump, and lively. (For a good discussion of Hildcgarde's works and reproductions of manv drawings see Singer 19^5 np 
1-58J 


13 


In spue of all the above pomes regarding general similarities. 1 cannot see anv reilltr close kinship between these drawings 
and those of the Voynich manuscript. The main import of the comparison with Opicinus and Hildegarde s productions is to 
demonstrate that such individualized, encyclopedic* symbolic works were by no means uncommon in the Middle Ages. The 
astrological manuscript (Vatican 1906) referred to by Petersen is not really very similar to the Voynich p*cmrcs either a 
ft refill study of the numerous illustrations of this and other simitar manuscripts (in Sax I 1915 and 19271 shows very few 
parallels to the cosmological or astrological diagrams in our manuscript. Most such medieval astrological pictures feature 
human figures* figures of animals, and other clearly recognizable graphic elements which are much less prominent in the 
abstract style of the Voynich drawings. 

33 Content oj Specific Classes of Drawings 


At the risk of bonng some readers, I will go into the appearance of the drawings in some detail in the following 
paragraphs: for various reasons, it is not possible to reproduce many of these folios for inclusion in this paper* and so a verbal 
description must suffice to convey some idea of their content to the reader who cannot obtain access to a photocopy of the 
manuscript. None of the sources 1 have studied has accorded much attention to most of these diagrams* or discussed their 
content in any way, excepting for a few passing mentions of details on this or that folio which some student happened to find 
useful or suggei ve in connection with a particular theory of his own. Therefore, 1 hope the reader will bear with me 
through the following somewhat length? discussion of individual drawings, and my attempt to come to grips with their 
specific content and detail. Figure 4 provides an overview and classification of the folios according to thar apparent subtea 
matter 


33* l Herbal Drawings. 

At first glance* the numerous illustrations of whole plants, usually accompanied by one or more paragraphs of text, seem 
to offer the best hope of a successful attack on the enigma. Other students have bent their efforts vigorously to the task of 
relating some, at least, of these drawings to known plants of to illustrations in other herbais, with results thar can only be 
described as disappointingly vague and ambiguous. Elizabeth Friedman summarizes the most substantial of the identification 
attempts as follows: 'Although a well-known American botanist. Dr. Hugh O Neill, believes that he has identified two 
American plants in (he illustrations, no other scholar has corroborated this, all agreeing that none of the planes depicted is 
indigenous to America. Sixteen plants, however, have been indisputably identified as European by the great Dutch botanist 
Holm. The remainder are composite: i*e** the root system belongs to one plant, the stem system to another* the leaves and 
flowers to still others. A few show imaginary root or flower structures*" (1962) Unfortunately* since Mrs. Friedman s article 
appeared in a newspaper, there was no citation of the reference to Holms substantial discoveries; I have not* so far, been able 
to turn up a published source for this information. Petersen appears to have obtained a detailed list of Holm s identifications 
from some source, and noted many of them on his transcript. In spite of Mrs. Friedman s emphatic and convincing statement 
of Holm s findings* later writers such as Tiltman (1968, 1975) do not seem to accept them as any more final than those of 
O'Neill. 

Many scholars seem to question O'Neills dramatic identification of the sunflower plant on folio 93 r (1944, p, 126) 1 can 
see good reasons* also* for questioning his "capsicum' or pepper-plant identification; the picture involved, on folio lOOr* is 
among the small* sketchy drawings arranged in rows near to a pharmaceutical jar"* possibly representing a reape for an 
herbal mixture. (For a discussion of these "pharmaceutical' drawings* see Section 3-3-2 below.) The objects O NeiJI sees as 
pepper fruits could as easily be leaves, drawn according to the curious, blocky convention habitually adopted by the scribe of 
the manuscript, to be discussed further below. This impression is supported by the fact that they are colored green, and not 
red. The "pepper ' identification was exploited by Brumbaugh in his decipherment; he suggests chat the coloring of the 
pe pper" g r e en rather than red was a matter of deliberate concealment ( 1974* p. 546). Many students have taken a stab at 
identifying the plant pictures; they are probably the most closely -studied drawings m the manuscript. The list of plant 
identifications compiled by Petersen in his hand transcript includes identifications he attributes to Mr. and Mrs. Voynich. 
O'Neill* and Holm (Petersen 1966)* 

At this point* I would like to pursue a brief digression concerning the idiosyncrasies of style in many plant structures 
shown tn the herbal folios. For what they are worth. I will present my own subjective, and admittedly personal, reactions, in 
the hope chat they mav stimulate others to examine these drawings more closely and reach their own conclusions, The plant 
parts frequently have a curious blocky, chunky, rough- hewn look* with platform-like structures surrounded by hard outlines 


14 


defining a sharp change of plane. To mv eve. this characteristic convention causes some of the structures to appear as if thev 
had been molded out of plastic: see, for example, the root crowns in folios 44v, 45r, 45v, 3 7v, 27v, 23r, 9 r, 1 ir. 13r. 16 \. 
and manv others too numerous to list. They seem to be provided with one or several circular platforms, consisting of tubes or 
inverted cones with flat, disk -like tops, from which the stems protrude, often encircled by a nag like a washer or gasket at 
their point of emergence (see figures 5-7 for some typical details from these drawings). 

An analogous structural peculiarity may be seen in the leaves of folios I5r 8 Sr, lOOr. 10iv2 (some of which are 
pharmaceutical' rather than "herbal 1 ' drawings): they seem to end in similar platform -and -gasket- like swellings. In the 
root structures of folios 3v. 22v, 45r, 45 v, 54v, 65r. and others, rubers are shown strung along the root fibers in a similar 
block v arrangement, like sea ions of pipe fined together. In folio 53r, they even seem rectangular, like a string of wooden 
blocks (figures 5~7 show some examples of these forms). I cannot guess at the significance which may lie behind this perva- 
sive element of style, but an understanding of it may well be important in interpreting the drawings and in tracing their origin 
The same sryhstic convention is apparent in the "pipes," "tubes, 11 and cloudlike structures in the mysterious folios featuring 
human figures (folios 75r and following) ,jo_ be, discussed more fully in 3*3.5 below, 

A somewhat similar block v, rough appearance is seen in some herbal drawings in other manuscripts, that have been 
copied over and over again from some much earlier source by successive scribes. This is the case, for example, in some earlv 
Anglo* Saxon medical manuscripts based on the drawings of Dioscorides. Illustrations I have seen of some plant pictures in an 
herbal artribured to Arnaidus of Vilianova, entitled "Traaatus de Virtutibus Her bar urn". have the same chunk v look as 
some of :he Vovmch manuscript folios fcf also Tiltman 1968, figure 6). If, as this would imply, our herbal drawings are 
copies ac manv removes from some earlier source, we should still be able to recognize them bv their general composition on 
the page and their struaure (number of stems, fruits or flowers, rough shape of leaves and roots. etc.J. especially since, as 
Tiltman pointed out (1968, p. II), the different sets of illustrations for earlv herbals were relative! v few and the same sets of 
pictures were used again and again over many centuries by successive compilers, 

I think, rather, that this angular quality is a feature of the scribe's personal srvle, and mav even have some symbolic 
significance. It is executed quite boldly and uncompromisingly, and does not seem to be an unintentional result of ineptness 
or clumsiness: the scribe definitely intended the plant parts to appear as he showed them. I offer the suggestion that the 
draftsman of these pictures was more accustomed to, and interested in, making mechanical or structural sketches than in 
illustrating natural objeas. 

Another point should be raised here* concerning the presence of animals and human faces attached to or intertw ined with 
the roots of some plants: for animals, see folios 25v, 49r; for faces, see 33r. 55v. 89rL Some root structures have the 
appearance of animal or human bodies, with the main plant stem emerging where the neck would be: see folios 99 v, 90 vl , 
89vl (lions,*), and 46v (a bird with spread wings: an eagle/). Some roots resemble the foot or feet of an animal, with claws 
and toes (e,g,. 89rl). There are known parallels to this practice in a number of earlv herbals. Frequenrlv. if a plant was 
supposed to provide an antidote to or protenion from the bite of some venomous creature, the animal was shown under or 
near the plane, almost as a mnemonic device to emphasize the association. The Vovmch manuscript examples mav have a 
similar purpose, except that in many cases the animal seems to be eating, hanging from, or burrowing in the plant much coo 
happily to be a target for its ill effects. Perhaps the intent is horticultural, implying that the worm, bird. etc., is frequenrh 
found with the plant, and feeds on it. Alternatively, and most probably (to mv mind), the meaning is purely symbolic, as is 
common in alchemical manuscripts. (For examples of animal forms, sec figures 8 and 9. ] 

The faces attached to some plant roots (see 33r, 89rl ). and the suggestions of eves, horns, snouts, etc., on other plant parts 
(see 38r. 28r, and figure 9 for examples), are considerably harder to explain. Tiltman (1968) cites the examples of the 
barnacle goose and the mandrake, well known to all students of earlv herbals. Some such personification of plants, or 
mingling of plant and animal life into one form, may be involved in the Voynich manuscript. The plant mav be considered to 
engender or nourish an animal, or to possess some animal or human qualities like those imputed to the mandrake. In anv 
case, J would like to suggest that these two signal oddities — the curious sculptural modelling of plant parts, and the presence 
of animal and human forms among plants parts — should receive more systematic study in comparison with similar praaices 
in known herbal and alchemical manuscripts (an interesting parallel in an alchemical manuscript dated to the sixteenth 
century will be noted in Section 8.8 below). 

Another curious structural feature of manv plant folios is the rigidly and mechanically symmetrical arrangement of plant 
stems and leaves. For example, the stems rising from the root crowns in folios 5r, 22r, 35 v, 4Gr. and 90r2. and the 
arrangement of the mam roots in folios 2r, Hr. 1 lv, I4r. 14v, 22v, 45 v. (and others) all exhibit a strange reentrant form, 
crossing one another or twining together in a curious knot- like manner (see figures 5 and 7). Leaves are arranged on stems in 
a rhythmically symmetrical pattern, for example in folios 3r, !3v, 22v. 29r. 4Lr, etc., which seems highlv contrived and 


Id 


mechanical, in harmonv wirh the architectonic quality exhibited elsewhere. This qualm is present even in the flowers or 
'(rum that grow from these strange molded -plasuc " plants; the flower on tulio 00 v 1, for example, looks like a sei ut 
metal spikes, rigidly fixed together; flowers in folios 3v. 6r. 56v. 90r2. and OOr look like the hoods ot vent-pipes rset ticure 
6s, (Again. some striking parallels will be mentioned in the alchemical manuscript discussed m Section 8,6 k 

3.3-2 Pharma cent tea l Dra wings. 

The pages in this section of the manuscript show rows of small, sketchv plants or plant parts, which seem to emptusize one 
structure — roots or leaves—ai the expense of the remainder. Thev are so abbreviated as to appear almost like mnemonic or 
shorthand symbols referring to plants already illustrated more fully m ocher folios, or to plants otherwise familiar to the 
scribe and his colleagues. A determined effort bv several students to relate these sketches to the herbal drawings has not been 
verv successful, however. 

The other salient feature of these pages is the presence of objects that have been said to resemble pharmaceutical tars or 
drug containers. On some folios (e.g.. 99r and 1G2 v 2L the fars are ’labelled” with phrases or words in the Vovmch script, 
unfortunately almost illegible in the photocopy at mv disposal because the pigment filling the bodv of the jars in mam cases 
tends to obscure the writing. In other cases, a ‘ label" seems to appear near the jar which probablv relates to u. or to the 
recipe” it stands for. A similar "label” appears near each small plant sketch in the rows; it is hard to tell, in some cases 
which of several neighboring plants is means bv each 'label”. One or more paragraphs of text are present between the rows 
of pictures. The jar u usually at the left margin of each such row, irremtibJv suggesting that the plants tn that row were to be 
used co make up the compound prescription symbolized bv that jar. The design of the* pars is verv ornate and florid, with 
many fined cylindrical sections decorated bv geometric designs, fanev cm hellish menu around the edges, curlv feet, and 
elaborate hnials or handles on the top (some of the latter resembling, to the irreverent modern eve, the central ornaments on 
an automobile hoodk see figure 15. The ornamentation and the "pipe -section* "structure is similar m stvle co that of the 
cans + from which some figures emerge on astrological folios (see below, 3 3 31 and to some of the fancy platform or pipe 
structures in the folios featuring human figures isee 3*3-5 J. 

3*33 Astrological and Astronomical Drawings, 

Prominent among the drawings are a series of circular designs apparently clearly related to the months of the year. and 
each provided with a central medallion showing a zodiac symbol A recognizable, if oddly-spelled. month name has been 
written in what most students agree is a different and later hand than that of the Vovnich script. Figure 10 shows details of 
these month names. The page for January and February (Aquarius and Capricorn 1 is missing, having been removed before 
the manuscript was found bv Voynich The srudent's first hope of gening anywhere through the known association with 
months or zodiac signs is soon disappointed, since there is apparently little die in the diagrams that can be remotch 
associated with conventional astrological diagrams and horoscopes. 

Most of the diagrams have approximately thirty female figures shown around the periphery in one, two. or three rows 
some of the figures are free-standing, while others appear to emerge from vertical or horizontal objects like cans or rubes 
some of which are decorated with a variety of heraldic -looking devices. Some of the figures are nude, but others are partial! v 
or fully clothed; the clothing visible on some of the figures includes veils, hats, crowns, and draperies of considerable 
elaboration, which should be traceable to a particular place and time with a little research. A few of the figures, as noted bv 
Petersen on his hand transcripts, may well be male rather than female. A careful study of the apparently intentionally 
distinctive designs on their "cans" mav provide a due to identification of the beings, or permit cross-matching some of them 
on different diagrams. Some of the 'cans" have crencllarions like castle battlements. Figure 1 1 shows an analysis of the 
numbers of figures on the different rows in each diagram; these arrangements mav correspond to some dassifi canon of the 
davs of the month important for medical practice; for example, the "Egyptian days" or "critical davs". 

The months of April and May with zodiac signs Aries and Taurus, stand out in contrast to the rest in that thev each have 
two circular medallions (folios 70vl. 7 lr. 7Lv. and 72r 1 ). and each has only fifteen figures, as if the two diagrams for the 
same month were intended somehow to complement each other, an idea supported bv the fact that the bull or ram is light - 
colored in one case and dark-colored in the other. An amusing matter for iperial note is the fact that the animal in each case 
is enjovmg a meal. Aries is dining with evident relish on the leaves of a small shrub, and Taurus is applying himself with 
equal determination to the conrents of a son of manger or feed box carefully and realistically placed at his disposal. These 
details, in my view, support a horticultural, medical, or agricultural context rather than a magical or mvstical one (although 


16 


this can be anlv an impression. Ac anv rate. I find it a pleasing indication of the sen be s praematR and down-to-earth 
approach 10 bis subject matter, whatever its meaning mav one dav prove to be 

A number of other drawings in which the sun. moon, and stars are prominent! v featured mav be provisionally classified as 
astronomical. J will attempt to present, in the following paragraphs, a sketch of the principal structural elements in each or 
these, since it is impossible to reproduce most of them in this paper. Figure 12 provides a summary of the numbers ot major 
elements in these diagrams along with the ’cosmological*' diagrams to be discussed in the next section. 

Folio Girl shows a central face, probably representing the moon, surrounded by a rwdve-poimed star; one side of each 
rav is decorated with stars, the other filled in with solid pigment. I n the contmuationof the pair of segments containing each 
raw single words or phrases in the Vovaith script alternate with groups of one or two small stars. Three concentric rings or 
text surround the whole, with a decorative marker indicating what mav be a starting position Folio 6 T vl is baseo on a 
somewhat similar plan, showing a widely -smiling sun face in the center of a system of seventeen double ravs. in which 
phrases of text alternate with groups of from one to four small stars. A single outer ring of text is i nterspersed w ith decorative 
separators. 

Folio 6lt2 is a complex circular design based on twelve-major divisions. In its center is an eight-pointed star, surrounded 
bv a ring of eight words. A dashed line indicates a starting point (.'I, Twelve moon faces, all facing to the right, occupy the 
next ring outside the central area; each is accompanied bv a text string. Twelve pie-shaped segments extend outward, one 
from each of the twelve moon faces. Seven of these contain additional words, and all contain paragraphs of text Each 
segment contains a phrase, apparently written in darker or heavier fashion, in its outer extremity A paragraph consisting ot 
three hres, (of which the middle one appears to be in heavier ink), is seen beneath the circular design. 

Folio 6Srl shows a roughly circular field of stars, with words or phrases in the Vovmch script written beside each Ac the 
rop is a larger circular medallion with a sun face, surrounded by a ring of text: a similar, balancing circle containing a moon 
face, also surrounded bv text, appears at the bottom There are at least twenty -eight stars with labels tsome mav have been 
cut off in the photocopy). Some of the stars also seem Larger or differently-colored than others, a distinction which mav have 
some significance in the doctrine of the scribe. Folio 68r2 appears to show a related or companion diagram, again on a 
circular field of stars; in this case, however, only the twentv-four stats in a central cluster are labelled. The sun face is ar the 
bottom, the moon face at the top of the star field in this diagram. Attempts to cross-match the rings of text around sun and 
moon, or the labels of individual stars on the two folios have so far been fruitless. Folio 68v 1 shows a central face, perhaps ^ 
sun. with a diadem or headband, surrounded bv small flames or ravs. A set of sixteen large double ravs emerges from the 
central face, one side dark and the other filled with small stars. This seems similar in form to folio 6“rl. and mav be related 
to it in the sun-moon pairing that seems to form a basic theme in the cosmological or alchemical doctrine involved in the 
manuscript. The continuations of the rhirtv-rwo separate segments containing the ravs contain alternate phrases of text and 
fields of small stars. Two outer rings of text surround the whole, with starting positions indicated bv vertical hnes 

Folio 6Sv2 shows an eight -painted, sun-like center surrounded by eight petal-shaped ravs; bevond this are four segments 
separated by four centrifugal lines of text. There is a further subdivision into eight segments, separated bv four more 
centrifugal text hnes emerging from the points of the central ‘ petals/’ Four fields of small stars are interspersed among the 
segments. A single text ring surrounds the whole, its starting point shown bv a vertical line. 

Finally, folio 68r3 displays a moon face within a system of eight major pie-shaped radiating segments containing four 
alternating fields of small stars and centrifugal lines of text, separated bv further subsidiary lines of text, in a plan similar to 
that of 68 v2 just described. A single ring of text surrounds the periphery, in which no starting marker can be discerned. 

It should be apparent that there is a systematic content of some sort in these diagrams. It mav relate to contrasted hours of 
night and day. times or events governed by different daises of stars, or effects of the sun and moon on the humors, elements, 
seasons, ages of man. winds, directions, etc. (to name some of the entities that are grouped bv ‘fours ’ in medieval cosmoloev 
and medicine) A group of seven small stars together in one segment of 68r3 las noted also bv other students), could well 
represent the Pleiades. Surely a careful and determined analysis of this wealth of structured content in conjunction with j 
study of medieval doctrines should turn up something of use to us in interpreting the meaning of the diagrams. 

5 3.4 Cosmological or Meteorological Drawings. 

There remain manv diagrams based on a fundamentally circular plan which show radiating segments, pipe- like or cell -like 
elements, cloud and vapor dusters, and a central star-like or sun-like medallion. Text words and single letters arc placed in or 
written along many of the cells and rays, and in concentric circular bands around them, with starting points indicated, in 
some cases, bv vertical lines or decorative markers. Figure 12 shows a survey of the numbers of major elements m these and 
the astronomical diagrams, lr seems likely that a systematic attempt to correlate numbers of related objects mav turn up some 


IT 


1 


interesting parallels among known medieval cosmological interns Number in itself had a magical significance in much 
medieval and Renaissance philosophy, probably originating in Pythagorean doctrines. Medieval magical books often showed 
elaborate parallel tables of "correspondences/' comprising lists of like- numbered things chat could be arranged in twos, 
threes* fours* up to elevens and twelves. In th* Pythagorean philosophy of sacred or magical numerology* the numbers four, 
seven* nine* and rwelve were considered especially important. Figure 14 show* some sets of elements extracted from tables in 
Agrippa { 19701; figure 35 shows elements important in the Cabala (see Section 8.7), and figure 34 contains some parallel 
lists of elements from Galenic medicine * 

One very curious, and also (to my ere l very attractive diagram on folios 85-86r2 la portion of the recto of a Urge, 
multiply folded page) shows a central sun face surrounded by four major segments. A line of text wirh a pair ot verticals 
indicating a starting place runs around the central sun This is in turn surrounded by a sort of scalloped parapet, over which 
four human figures may be seen; these figures seem clearly to represent a child* a boy* a man. and an oldster bent tor ward 
over his cane. Over the head of each figure is a copious paragraph of teat The four main segments arc separated bv graceful 
spouts of vapor that emerge beyond an outer circular border containing a nag of teat, and recurve gracefully back into the 
segment to the left of their point of emergence. This drawing seems iikeiv to be related to the four seasons, the four ages of 
man. the four humors* etc** as shown m figure 34; it appears that these associations might provide a point of attack into the 


text within its four sections- 

The general plan of the "four ages" diagram just described is highly reminiscent of a figure from an Anglo-Saxon 
medical rainiiscrinc (Caius College* Cambridge* MS. 428* fo* 50* Grattan 1952* p. 941. The Anglo-Saxon diagram shows 
four human figures holding jars from which four spouts fall toward the center of the circular medallion and divide rt into 
four mam segments. A small central arde shows another human figure receiving the effects of these outpourings, within a 
rmg of text in very dumsy and illiterate Latin* illegible tn the illustration. An outer ring of text surrounding the whole 
contains another Laboriously copied Latin sentence* Quartuor humores bishina partes liquores effundum tenet i per corpora 
sic michrochosmi/' On either side of the four large figures are more Latin words* some illegible* which seem to refer to the 
humors* properties, and elemenp Tcolera rubta* " "caUdiii," "sicca*" '"sanguis*" "ealidm*" "humidus"; it* "Irigida.” 
"humida;' V'terra*" "frigida*" "sicca")* Figures of this sort are very common in medieval astrological and medical 
manuscripts, and refer to the central doctrine of the 'microcosm'' or “small world" of the human being, thought ro reflea or 
recapitulate in numarurc the elements and relations of the larger universe or " macrocosm." The usual form of such 
diagrams shows i human figure with lines conneuing its parts with ocher words or pictures supposed to stand for forces 
affecting them in the stars* weather* etc. (cfSaxl 1915 and 1927; &amp;ober 19481* 

Another very remarkable diagram on folio 67 v 2 seems to stand in a class mil bv itself* unlike anything in ocher 
manuscripts, It suggests a meteorological theme, based on four major divisions that may be the seasons. Four puffs of vapor 
rush in from the four corners, half- concealing for. perhaps* giving birth to or supporting.') two suns and rwo moons 
(Newbold interpreted one or more of these features as a "solar eclipse ") A dotted line extends inward to the center from ihe 
sun on the upper left perhaps indicating the starting point of the chronology or story* A sun wirh spiral rays inside a square 
occupies the center* More vapor puffs squirt out centrifugal! v between the four outer ones* and Lines of text are written along 
bands leading to both sets* Strangest of ail* the four outer corners are occupied by roughly circular arrangements of face -like, 
balloon-shaped objects strung along pipes or bands to form simple* angular, geometric figures lan "X'\ a "4'\ etc.). One of 
these forms* m the lower left corner of the page, shows four balloon-faces in a U-Uke arrangement opening at the top. 
superimposed on a arde with three segments colored blue, green, and red; as we will see below* this tripartite circular figure 
occurs elsewhere in the manuscript, and may represent a conventionalized map of the inhabited world fT-diap")* The onlv 
interpretation that suggests itself for these geometric figures is that of cruaal conjunctions of planets* or magical scar 
figures, associated with the four seasons* directions* winds* ages of man. or other important events in the ungucssable 
doctrine beinp expounded in this enigmatic work. The stringing of circles or dots (although not faces) along lines in 
geometrical arrangements is seen in Picamx (Ritter and Plessncr 19621* where the intent is to show "star pictures or 
constellations to be employed as magical characters I see 8.4). Somewhat similar characters made up of dots or circles soung 
on lines are seen in alchemical manuscripts as well as m some magical alphabets (see 8.8 and 9*4. and figures 41 and 42 h 
Another unique diagram* folio 57v. shows five concentric circles of text with a fiindv -indicated common scarring pome at 
the upper left. In the center are four human figures* shown from the waist up; four bands of text radiate outward between 
the figures from a central scalloped medallion, and four more text lines are disposed between che figures in such a wav that 
their raised hands seem to point at. grasp, or support these. The structure of eight bands of text in two groups of four each is 
similar to chat of many other diagrams in che manuscript. This, too, is the diagram chat contains a sequence of seventeen 


18 


enigmatic svmbol* repealed four times around the second of its concentric text rings. It is one of verv fe* cases of cyclically 
repeating lists anywhere in the text, and has been subjected to much attention bv students as a possible kev“ uee figure 24* 
Folio 68v3 is the drawing referred to bv Newbold as a spiral nebula/' A central circle is divided bv a horizontal line 
through the center; the upper half ts again bisected by a line from top to center This plan resembles the scribbled geometric 
figure in the center of folio 85-86v3 (for which see below). A word or phrase is written in each of the upper halves, and a 
longer paragraph in the lower semicircle. A ring of text surrounds this figure, with a starting point shown bv a marker Four 
major outer segments are separated bv gracefully-curving bands of text, within these are watery or wavy outlines, del mine 
fields containing curving rows of stars on the same spiral plan. From the top center of each waw outline, four smaller curved 
text bands spiral ourward. in the same plan of two sets of four elements we have seen so frequently in other diagrams. An 
outer ring of text surrounds the whole, its start dearly marked by a decorative sign. This design, with its double-tour 
structure, may also refer to the seasons, ages, humors, or the like. It may abo have a geographical implication, since 
the ^ svmbol occurs elsewhere in medieval iconography as a form of symbolic map of the inhabited world. 

Folio 7 Or I shows a six-pointed star with^*a. words of, text between its points It is surrounded bv a curious ring of fiftv- 
eight tarefuilv-drawn cell-like objects, alternately empty and occupied bv pairs of dots, and a ring of text. Nine wave* or 
foam -like spouts emerge from a watery held surrounding the inner circle. Mine bands of text arc written radial l v outward 
from the interstices of these waves. Three concentric rings of text surround the whole. There is little to aid us in 
understanding this drawing other than a possible focus on water as an element or moisture as a propem, with their effects on 
health, and the numbers six. nine, and fifty -eight. 

Folio 69r also shows a central six-pointed star; five single characters and one digraph are placed berween the points A 
ring of text surrounds this central medallion. Beyond are fonv-five pipe -like, elongated ravs closelv packed together, with 
heavier tines separating them into irregular groups of one. two, and three rays. Text lines are written radially along twenty - 
one of these rays, and there is a ring o: text surrounding all. Folio 69v is somewhat similar, with a central eight -pointed star 
having small stars between its points. Twenty -eight pi pc-like things emerge radially from the center, with a text word or 
phrase written above the mouth of each as though issuing from it. Three rings of text run around (he outer periphery. 

A small moon face occupies the central field of folio 85-86v4; five frothy or bubblv concentric rings of cells, scallops, or 
waves run around the center The heads, arms, and shoulders of four human figures rise from the middle nog as from a sea. 
Their arms are raised, and their hands are holding indistinguishable objects, one of which mav be a cross. Four lines of text 
surround the whole, with a clearly-shown starting point on the left 

Folio 85-86v3 contains a verv strange drawing dominated bv four complex structures shaped rough l v like inverted cones 
emerging from the corners of the page and extending inward toward the center. The upper left cone looks like a duster of 
grapes, douds, or cells; from its tip. directed tow ard the center, a spurt of some substance issues, with the head and hand of a 
human figure emerging from the duster beside it. The upper right structure is like a broad tube made up of scales or scallops 
or waves in crosswise rows: from it a large gush of vapor or wind emerges toward the center, and within this a bird is flying 
vigorously The rwo lower objects are more elongated in form and seem to be made up of la vers of longitudinal fibers with 
interjecting crosswise rows of cells. One gives forth a large jet of specks like snow or rain aimed into the center of the page, 
with a human figure half revealed as if peering around one side of the jet and flinging out a smaller jet of droplets with his 
outstretched right hand. The remaining cone, in the lower right corner, emits no jets of vapor, but instead has a bird seated 
on its apex, as if on a nest; bending over the seated bird are three branch -like structures on sulks. Four text paragraphs 
occupy the four sides of the page between the large spouts, and a fifth paragraph is placed in the upper center. 

It seems possible that the four jets may represent the Four Winds converging upon the earth, and that this diagram, like 
several others of this section, may be concerned with the seasons and the weather. The nesting bird, and the other, possibly 
migrating, bird would be explicable within this frame of reference. A scribbled diagram of a circle with three subsections 
© , like that in folio 68v3, occupies the otherwise empty center of the page; next to it and scrawled across it is a 
disorderly scribbling that resembles ta re less! v -written Arabic script. This scribble is closelv similar to another in the lower 
left center of folio 66v. where it also seems to be associated with a rrudelv- formed geometric figure. (See figure 21 for details 
of these scribbled phrases , ) 

Finally, folio 70r2 shows a central face, probably a sun, surrounded bv eight large segments containing petal- like ravs. A 
small ring of text runs around the center, and four more lines of text surround the whole. The outer lines appear to be in rwo 
pairs: the outer pair has a common starting point indicated by a double vertical, while the inner pair has a different common 
stan shown by a single vertical. A paragraph of text accompanies the design on the upper right corner of the page. 

The above lengrhv. but still verv incomplete discussion of these interesting cosmological diagrams can bv no means do 
justice to the amount of information available in them for the student witling to accord to them the respect required for a 


19 


careful and mtemati c examination. I belitve ic has been tuo read it v assumed bv mast students that the draw mo in the 
Vovmch manuscript were too weird and nonsensical to warrant this attention. The research must await the efforts or 
someone who has access fas I do nui have* 10 a large number of medieval manuscripts, or facsimile copies of these A 
thorough invest! canon, pursuing some of the striking itonographical elements in the drawings, rnighr rurn up some usetul 
parallels that could provide an understanding of the teat, 

3. Jp3 Drawings F Maturing Human Figures, 

The drawings on folios 75 r and v and "*6v through 8-iv are probable the most mvsterious and bizarre of all the mam 
enigmas with which the Vovnich manuscript confronts us. Thev show sequences of human figures, almost msurubh nude 
and female, and las has been very frequently and somewhat arthlv noted bv other students &gt; quite plump and marnmlv in 
form. Most of them have distended abdomens and bulging hips: thev certain! v do not present an appearance ot voluptuous 
beauty to the modern American eve. The impression is rather one of agricultural fertility, maternal fecund in and 
nourishment, or something on a similar pragmatic plane. Many of the figures seem to have long hair, crowns, or elaborate 
veils in spire of their otherwise complete lack of clothing. Their poses are iiveiv. expressive, and varied - 

The female figures are shown variously sitting, standing, king, or otherwise disposed in or on curious objects like tubs, 
tubes, pipes, eo? I -scuttles, puipiu. pods, or platforms. These obi ecu are drawn in the same chunks, blockv stvJe nt 
architectonic sol iitv as was noted above in connection with the plants. In fact, some of them look quite a lot like the fruits, 
seed pods, and root or stem structures of these verv plant drawings. Note, for example, the two striking spherical objects, 
somewhat resembling mines or bombs trailing fuses, crossed on folio 83v, to mv eve. they close! v resemble the twin fruits &gt; r • 
on the plant in folio 90r 1. A structure on folio 79v of three pipes surrounding a larger central tube resembles the root crown 
of the same plant on folio 90rl. Similarly, a tripartite structure on folio 77v made up of three nest- or pulpit-like swellings 
connected by pipes, with three tuber -like objects hanging from the central swelling, looks to me like the root crown of a plant 
with three main stems connected by underground roots or stolons (see figure 15 for examples I. 

Some of the female figures seem to be holding spindle-shaped objects that could be fruits or seed pods. The pipe-like 
structures that coil around the figures (and into which, or from which, thev appear to be transmitting some mvsterious vapor 
or liquid) could well represent plant para such as roots or stems in schematic form. Abo to be remarked upon are cloud -like 
dusters, puffs and spravs of vapor emerging from the numerous vents of these pipes, and the substantial -looking tubs of 
liquid in which groups of female figures seem to be sitting, standing, or moving about. Some form of humor, essence, 
moisture, or sap seems to be of primary importance in the doctrine expressed bv these pictures. In some folios le.g.. ~5r. to 
the left of a descending line of figures: 82v. at top right and also two more below, center), arc -Like structures seem to span 
openings in some of the little scenes These look a great deal like rainbows, although without seeing the original colors one 
can only guess: most of the arcs seem to have four or five separate concentric segments with a darker band at the top. i For a 
discussion of an alchemical drawing containing a pipe with multiple vents emitting vapor, in a sryle similar to the pipes on 
these folios, see Section 8.8). 

Another important detail to be noted in several of the drawings of this section is a small cross with one long arm ifcr 
example, at the top of folio 75 r. serving as a focus for diverging rays: on 75 v to the right within a field of ravs and douds; on 
7gr at the focus of a grape- or cloud -like duster at upper left; and on 79v, top, at the focus of a fnUv canopv of ravs over the 
head of a figure who also holds a cross in her hand). These symbols are quite small and unobtrusive, but usually seem id 
form a central focus or origin for rays descending upon the female figures. The obvious interpretation is one of Dr vine 
illumination or influence promoting the fecundating, nourishing, or healing vinues of the humors controlled bv. or 
represented bv rhe female figures. The crosses provide an unmistakably Christian frame of reference for the doctrine bem£ 
expounded by the scribe of the manuscript — a point not specifically remarked upon by other students to my knowledge. 

Whit are we to make of these strange drawings/ A possibility that immediately occurs to me is that thev mav relate the 
doctrines of Galenic humoral medicine, with its four "digestions" and various byproducts at different stages, to the 
nourishing or curative properties of the plants or prescriptions of the herbal and pharmaceutical folios. Another possibility is 
a system of therapeutic baths; this was a common feature of medieval medicine: warmth and moisture were supposed to be. 
in themselves, healing forces. It is amusing to note in this connection that Roger Bacon, an his medical work De Retardation* 
Accidtnitum Senecturis (Bacon 192Ba), recommends perfumed oils, warm effusions, and the application of precious 
occulta' such as lign-aioes, "heart bone of a stag." and viper s flesh. (This medical work was a competent and complete 
compilation of earlier medical sources such as Galen. Pseudo- Aristotle, and numerous Arabic writers, and was plagiariaed 
and exploited bv later physicians; little in it. however, was original with Bacon.) 


20 


Brumbaugh ( 1975 i has seen in these pictures a recipe for the 'Elixir of Life/' designed to look like Roeer Batons *ork 
i Bacon's medical treatise, his work entitled BpsstoU de Mtrabilt Potestate Artis et Naturae, and some garbled or doubtful 
versions of bs alchemical writings were the only fragments of his writings well-known in the sixteenth century] Panofsk v 
f 1 954, p. n, suggests that the human figures may represent '’astral spirits" transmitting the influences radiated from the 
stars into plants and other living things. Singer, in his Letter to TiUman. 12 November 1957, puts forward a different, 
though related, suggestion: "Mv own feeling — again very vague — about the little figures of nude men and women m the 
organs of the body is that they are somehow connected with the ' archaei" of the Faraceisan or Spagvric School. This would 
fit in well with mv suggestion about John Dee and Bohemia." Note that Singer sees the tubes, pulpits, and pipes in which the 
figures sit as "organs of the body, rather than as the plant parts they recall to me. Figure 1 3 shows an analysis of the 
numbers and grouping of female and male figures on the folios of this section. 

3.3.6 Network of Rosette s t Folios 85-86ri~4 t vl-2 . 

This elaborate am v of circular medallions coven severai-segmena of a Large, multi ply- folded page. It has received Little or 
no study or mention bv students: this mav be partly because us complexity and bizarre character boggles the mmd ahead v 
overburdened bv the "queerness" to the modern eve of so much else in the manuscript. The failure of some students to p*\ 
much attention to these designs is also probably due to the poor quality of the photocopy available to us for these pages The 
photocopy made from Father Petersen's original copv is so dark, and the numerous scraps of text wnrren here are there are mi 
hard to read, that it is almost unusable, 

A phorostatic copv which I recently obtained from the Beinecke Library reveals the details of this remarkable draw me 
very dearly There are nine elaborate circular designs, m three rows of three each. The central design in the middle row is 
larger than the others, and contains six pharmaceutical "jars" arranged in an oval pattern with stars in the center. Between 
the medallions are veils of cell-like or fibrous structures that link each cirde to its immediate neighbors. One medallion 
shows a structure like a castle and other small buildings around its periphery; the castle has a high, crenellated wall and a 
call central tower. The center of this figure contains a circular field of stars and a spiral arrangement of text. Nearby, m the 
outer corner of the page, is a smalt cirde containing a © diagram with Voymdi text "words" within its segments. In the 
opposite corner of the page is the small "clock-face" mentioned bv Brumbaugh i about which more will be said below i In 
the other two corners are sun faces surrounded by wavy ravs. Some of the medallions have petal-like arrangements of ruvs 
filled with stars, recalling features of the cosmological and astronomical folios discussed previously. Manv medallions are 
provided with curious structures like bundles of pipes or gunbarrels clustered around the periphery of their outer circular 
outlines. This complex assemblage of symbols deserves far more attention than it has so far received, in mv opinion, since it 
could provide some enlightening synthesis or frame of reference for individual diagrams elsewhere in the manuscript. 

A mention should be made here of Brumbaugh's identification of a "clock face" among these diagrams. There is a tin* 
circle, surrounded by eight!/} designs vaguely resembling Roman numerals, and what may be a small nng of text, on the 
extreme left side of the structure. In the center of this circle is a triangular arrangement of two intersecting lines with three 
small spheres strung on them, at their free ends and at their intersection. While it is true that this circular design bears some 
superficial resemblance to a clock face, it seems possible to me that it may also represent a star picture like those of 
and the similar alchemical characters mentioned above Section 3 *3.4. The two "hands'' look to me as if thev are intended to 
be of equal length, and the hands" are not centered on the "clock face"' as one would expea. but rather arranged so that the 
entire triangular structure is centered in the circle. An exactly similar triangular symbol with three balls strung on it occurs 
frequently among the star spells of Picamx . and was used bv alchemists io mean arsenic, orpiment. or posusb (German 
1922. Tables IV. XXXXHL XXXXVh 

3-3*7 Small Marginal Designs. 

There are small drawings of people. ammaLs, and other less easilv -identifiable objects on some pages. Folio 66r. as has 
already been noted, contains a drawing of a man lying on his back clutching his stomach as if sick or dead, and surrounded 
bv various indeterminate small objects. The Last pge. 116v. has several sketches of people, animals, and other mysterious 
shapes in its upper left corner. Most of the pages filled with text (folios 103 and following} have single stars, some provided 
with extensions like tads, to the left of each paragraph. These paragraphs, as has been pointed out by Tilcman \ 197 V 
probablv comprised approximately 365 originally, thereby providing one "star reape' " for each dav of the vear, possibly a se* 
of astrological predictions or prescriptions. 


21 


3-4 Meaning of the Collection of Drawings as a Whole 

Voynich stated his impression on fine seeing the manuscript, that ' the drawing] indicated it to be an encyclopedia work on 
natural philosophy' (1921, p. I). Eliiebech Friedman says: 'The 'botanical' and largest section of the manuscript (125 
pages) is probably herbaLutk in character, and the manuscript mav constitute what is now called a pharmacopeia" (1962). 
Panofsky provides another dear summary: "So far as can be made out before the manuscript has been decoded, its content 
would comprise: first, a general cosmological philosophy explaining the medical properties of terrestrial objects, parotularlv 
plants, by celestial influences transmitted by astral radiation and those spirits' which were frequently believed to transmit the 
occult powers of the stars to the earth; second, a kind of herbal describing the individual plants used for medicinal and 
conceivably, magical purposes, third, a description of such compounds as may be produced bv combining individual plants in 
various ways" (1954, p 1}. He confesses that he is unable to suggest any known medieval parallel synthesizing all ot these 
doctrines into one compact book. (There were, in fact, a number of very large encyclopedic works of many volumes that 
covered a somewhat similar range of toptn: an obvious example that comes to mind is the work of Albertus Magnus, a 
contemporary of Roger Bacon.) 

Petersen provides a similar view of the manuscript as a whole: The illustrations in the manuscript make it appear ail hut 
certain that the text deals with medicinal plants and their use in medieval remedies. The drawings of folios 67-86 seem to 
illustrate astrological matters, and possibly the medieval theory of vital spirits functioning as animate beings (represented bv 
small nude figures)' . . . . Might not the 324 separate short paragraphs or sentences (folios 103-1161 contain a sort of 
subject index or table of contents or list of recipes/" 1 1953. p- 1 ) Brumbaugh sees the manuscript as a treatise on the "Elixir 
of Life ", designed to interest the Emperor Rudolph 11 bv a forger who wished to make it appear to be the work of Roger 
Bacon. An 'encydopedic sequence of drugs", possibly compiled from a variety of earlier manuscripts, is followed bv 
astrological lore; the folios featuring nude female figures may deal. Brumbaugh chinks, with "the biology of reproduction, 
the theology of psychic reincarnation, or the topical application of the elixir". ( 1975. pp, 348-349). 

In studying the dnwings in the different sections of the manuscript, I have come to feel strongly that they involve a high I v 
symbolic, artificial, and conventionalized graphic or mnemonic "language" that uses the same representations or forms to 
call to mind particular key concepts on different folios and in various combinations with one another. This graphic 
"alphabet" or ihorthand seems in man? wavs closely similar in its philosophy to the -interesting structure of the Vovmch 
script (to be dealt with in Chapter 4). For this reason, I believe tbiE a careful, painstaking, and open-minded analysts of all 
the drawings and their component graphic elements, indexing and cross- matching all the forms, might repay the effort 
involved. An experiment using modern computer CRT terminals with graphics capabilities so perform such analysis would be 
worthwhile, if earned out within a carefully -reasoned theoretical framework (ue.. to pursue and investigate particular 
theories previously developed bv the student concerning meaningful relations among the forms!. More will be said in Section 
6 9 regarding the use of computer techniques tn studying the manuscript. 


Chapter 4 

Avenues of Attack: The Text 

4.1 Nature and Characteristics of the Voynich Script 

However complex and interesting the drawing! are. the script in which the bulk of the manuscript is written is 
undoubtedly the most intriguing pan of the elegant enigma. It has a deceptively flowing, rhvthmic quaiitv that suggests long 
practice and familiarity on the pan of the scribe or scribes. The script seems like a reasonable, workable, well-constructed 
system of writing, with a Kook of ease and natural flow. On closer inspection, the surface appearance of simplicity vanishes, 
and a still more seductive and- captivating charaaer. emerges^ in the form of an intricate but structurally logical svstem of 
ligaturing or compounding of simple forms to build up more complex outlines. Whatever else may be alleged concerning the 
value of the manuscript as a whole to science. [ am convinced that an understanding of the construction of this writing system 
cannot fail to be of great interest in the study of human thought. It appears to be a tour de force of artistry and ingenuity 

4* LI Provenience and Style. 

Unfortunately, although many students mention the style, calligraphy, and appearance of the script as a factor in their 
judgements of the date and origin of the manuscript, they provide linie real evidence or detail to back up their claims 
Nowhere among the sources I have examined have I seen any really factual or complete discussion of the matter Some 
sources mention, in passing, the possible derivation of the Voynich symbols from ’’Roman minuscule characters. ' McKaig 
in.d.) states that "the text is written in a beautifully symmetrical script that slightly resembles writing used in Italy in the 
1 500 V (p. 48).' 

4. L2 Relationships to Knoum Scripts and Character Sets. 

Attempts to link fhe origin of the Voynich symbols to other systems of writing have been many and far-ranging. A diligent 
study of known alphabetic, syllabic, or ideographic scripts has turned up nothing remotclv similar, though various individual 
symbols have distant parallels in some compendia. Several symbols resemble earlv forms of Arabic numerals: this has been 
pointed out by more than one student of the manuscript, for example, bv A. W. Exell (of the Botanical Library. British 
Natural History Museum), in a letter to Tiltman. 30 August 1957, and by Robert Brumbaugh (1974. 1975 k Figure 16 
shows a comparison of some Voynich symbols and various forms of early Arabic numerals extracted from tables in Hill 
f 1915) that look similar in my opinion. (See also Secrion 8 JO for a discussion of the history of Arabic numerals in Europe J 
Some form of substitution cipher may be involved, of course; thus, the fact that a given Vovnich symbol looks like an earlv 
form of "7" or "4”. for example, need not imply that it actually stands for that number in the text. Earlv forms of Arabic 
numerals were often employed in a wide variety of codes and ciphers, as we will see in Chapter 9 

Similarities are also clearly apparent between some Voynich symbols and certain Latin abbreviations in use at various 
limes during the Middle Ages. These relationships have been investigated and exploited by several students, notably Petersen 
and Feelv. Figure 17 shows a selection of Latin abbreviations extracted from Cappelli (1949) and some Vovnich symbols 
that resemble them in my opinion. A general similarity was apparent to me. and was also noted, independently and earlier, 
by Tiltman. between certain commonly -occurring looped symbols standing above the line and the decorative extensions of 
letters with tall stems in the top line of a manuscript illustrated in Cappelli (Table IV h Some artificial writing svsrems of 
various kinds that might throw some light on the Voynich script will be discussed in Chapter 9 

4. L 3 Attempts to Decompose the Symbols into Elements. 

It has been concluded by most students that the Voynich script includes at least some compound symbols. Various attempts 
have been made to arrive at a rationale to explain the ligatures and resolve them consistently into component elements. Some 
students have proposed that the symbols may have been built up from elementary strokes in a manner similar to the method 
upon which thev supposed that the Chinese writing system was based. Tiltman suggested th?t missionaries visiting the Far 
East, who had studied the Chinese system, might have brought back a description of it which then might have inspired some 
fifteenth- or sixteenth -century scholar ro design the Voynich script (unpublished notes) A. W Exell, in hts letter to 


23 


Tillman. 50 August 19V* refers to a theorv (not further specified j that earlv Arabic numerals were built up trom ont. rwo 
three, four or more strokes in a similar Oriental manner: he suggests a sketch \ and incomplete correspondence between 
Vovnich svmbols and conventional numerals along these lines. No one has* to mv knowledge, worked out a stroke theorv 
of this kind in sufficient detail to test it out as a hypothesis. 

In this connection, it is interesting to note that Roger Bacon provided extensive information concerning the Far East in a 
highly interesting section of the Opus Maps on geography and the customs of foreign peoples* He states there that he had 
closely questioned several missionaries and travellers recently returned from visits to these far-awav places His descriptions or 
manv foreign peoples and customs arc clearly recognizable, although some are fabulous and distorted, as might be expected 
A dear description of Buddhist monks at worship, even including a garbled version of Om mane pad me hum is 
particular l v striking The following is his description of writing in China The people in Carhav to the cast write with the 
same instrument with which punters palm, forming in one character groups of letters* each group representing a sentence B\ 
this method characters are formed with many letters together, whence reasonable and natural characters have been composed 
of letters, and have the meaning of sentences.'' (Bacon 1928b. p. 389.1 

The compound Vovnich symbols are not easy to "uke apart' in am consistent and unambiguous wav: ibe\ are ton 
smoothly blended to form a single flowing outline. Figure 18 shows some examples of apparently compound forms, and some 
suggestions regarding their decomposition. Some symbols which appear to be simple at first sight mav in fan also be 
compounds: for example. mav be made up of r L and *\ and mav be a combination ot ^ .me 

^ Mv own feeling is chat we need not go as far afield as the Orient to explain these complex outlines: the sutem or 
Latin abbreviations tn common use throught the Middle Ages has the same character. An abbreviated lurm tvpiialh 
preserves one or two letters of a word and distorts or combines them to form a single sinuous, conventionalized character 
Some of the parts of such a compound form may then be pamaJlv disconnected and used in abbreviations oi other, partialh 
similar words. The distorted and truncated scrips of words are usually combined with over lines, supcrtixed characters, loops, 
tails* and slant Lines which mark the form as an abbreviation* or stand for a set of missing letters Each of these structural 
features has a counterpart in the Voynich script: a horizontal stroke seems to connect manv svmbols: a comma* or hook -like 
mark often appears above certain svmbob, and characters are frequently shown standing above or in the midst of others as 
infixes or superfixes; long tails curve up or slant down from letters at the ends of words and lines. 

It is mv feelmg that we need not look beyond the system of Latin abbreviations, familiar to all learned men of the Middle 
Ages and Renaissance throughout Europe, combined with earlv forms of Arabic numerals and some common alchemical and 
astrological svmbob* to find the inspiration for the design of the Vovnich script Unfortunately for the student, the designer 
has exhibited a truly remarkable ingenuity in blending and distorting these elements so as to make of them an entirely new 
writing svsiem* fundamentally independent of and distinct from any of its sources, so that our recognition of similarities rt» 
known symbols has not helped us to unlock the secret of the script. It is interesting to note that the characters which occur as 
superfixes or infixes with other ligatured characters may also occur next to them in ordinary sequence: the explicit and care* 
fuJIv shown ligature must, therefore* provide some distinct element of meaning. (For example, is C"E ' the same as 0 C f 
How does vr differ from “ « V Is " 5ft equivalent to Tf cr m crV or neither.') 

Most crvptanalvnca 11 y -oriented students of the manuscript have put considerable effort into analyzing the script and 
attempting to devise a working transcription alphabet for use in crvpunalvuc and computer studies. Various researchers have 
adopted different theories regarding the decomposition of the symbols into elements* and the identification of variant for ms 
of a single symbol* Some* Uke Tiltman and the First Voynich Study Group* arrived ai a relatively small working alphabet ot 
basic symbols, regarding all the rest as secondary compounds. At the other extreme* Currier* Krischcr* and the Second Srudv 
Group included a number of obvious compounds m their working alphabet to produce a considerably longer list of svmbols 
Currier 's alphabet and the others based on it embody a theorv about the svmbol " k “ and its occurrence in groupings of one, 
two. or three immediately preceding certain ending svmbols ‘ and own transcription alphabet 

includes an attempt to allow for some relatively rare ligatured elements in addition to those in the commoner compounds 
Figure 1 9 shows several different transcription alphabets. 

4-L4 Variant and Embellished Forms of Symbols. 

While all have agreed that a relationship of some sort exists among certain families of similarly -shaped symbols, students 
have associated them differently depending on their theories regarding the exact nature of the kinships (see figure 19i. 
Considerable interest has centered on the four looped symbols" ^ M t ff * * -4^ "that are all found as infixes or 

superfixes over the svmbol ‘ CT " as well as alone. An interesting bit of evidence for the identity of and ’* ^ (and 
thus, bv analogy* the ocher pair T and as wellL may be seen on folio 57r* where a sequence of seventeen symbols is 


24 


repeated four times around a circular band. It is so rare to find anv sequence in the Voynich manuscript repeating all nr some 
portion of itself that this example is almost unique. Figure 24 shows the tour repeated segments arranged in parallel, in two 
instances, the symbol ” with only one loop, occurs in the ninth place, while in the other two. we see " " with two 

clear loops in the corresponding position. Since all the other symbols appear identical, the conclusion seems inescapable that 
the single- and double -looped forms art functionally the same. Countervailing against this conclusion is the tact thu the 
symbols are always made quite clear lv and distinctly, with either one or two loops; there are rareiv if ever anv transitional or 
marginal forms with vestigial or careless! v- formed loops. In anv case, there is an obvious family relationship of some kind 
among the four looped symbols, as shown bv their simiiaritv of form, their entering into similar constructions. Jnd their 
assuming a similar function and positions in the structure of text words. 

Embellishments are relatively few m the Vovnich rest. Figure 20 show s some variant and decorative forms of symbols 
various students have tentatively identified them; many of the assumed identifications arc mv own opinions. Some ot the 
decorative extensions and flourishes are quire attractive in a bizarre and idiosyncratic wav. Smalt dots inside loops, parallel 
hatching along lines, don arranged tn rows .-and exaggeration or. prolongation of loops are frequent ornamental devices The 
embellishments are. for the most part, highly resttained. and not at all the extravagant, disorderly overgrowth one michr 
ex pea of a deranged mind. It should be noted also that the ornamental extensions rareiv. if ever, impinge on or tnreriere 
with writing or drawings nearby, and that it is rare in general for writing or drawings to cross one another anv where in the 
text, except in a controlled and orderly manner 

The curious embellishments appear to exhibit the same rhythmic, pragmatic, and compact character as is evident m other 
aspens of stvle throughout the manuscript. A particularly notable and amusing decorative flourish is the apparem 
disconnecting of the two loops of the character " Jf ", so that one stem and loop is translated horizontally into a 
neighboring word, sometimes with several intervening curlicues: figure 20 provides a number of examples. It is possible that, 
in some cases, the intent mav be to combine two separate occurrences of " 'into one decorative flourish, there may also 
be some element of meaning in the practice, although it is scarcely frequent enough, especially in lines ocher than initial lines 
of paragraphs, to support such a conclusion. 

4.2 Other Scripts. and Hands 

On certain pages of the manuscript are found isolated phrases and sentences in scripts and bands judged bv most students to 
be different from, and probably later than, the bulk of the text (although none of the sources I have studied present Jn\ 
definitive evidence supporting a different date or authorship for these scattered text strings) Petersen reports that Miss Nil) 
(a friend of Mrs. Vovnich) had made a thorough examination of all the apparently extraneous passages tn the manuscript 
Miss Nill . has listed all words or passages which appear to be wruten rr different ink from char used uniformly for the 
text and the drawings throughout the manuscript. (She noted also that the original text seems to show not a single erasure 
and correction anvwhere,) Miss Nill declares that the last page is written tn the same ink as the bulk of the manuscript 
H953. p, I), Unfortunately, no copv of Miss Nill* list has survived m the material to which 1 have access I offer the 
following summary from mv own examination of the photocopy available to me. 

Folio lr. There are very faint and barely legible traces of alphabetic sequences in the left and right margins These are not 
visible ai all in the photocopy 1 have studied, but Petersen shows them clearly m his hand transcript. The letters seem to bt 
those of the ordinary ABC ", with some slightly distorted or odd forms. The two sequences appear to be parallel, in their 
fragmentary state, it is hard to tell whether they are consistently associated with the lines of Vovnich text occupying the 
center of the page. 

Folio 1 7 r. A line of writing in a verv small, crabbed hand crosses the top center of the page. It is verv hard to make out; to 
my eye. the letters resemble Greek symbols. The writing becomes fainter and harder to read toward the right side and finalK 
fades out completely. In the upper right corner, there is a faint, scribbled symbol like a shield or a crude flcur dr lys. criss- 
crossed with lines. It is interesting to note that John Dee liked to use Greek letters to conceal comments in English in his 
personal diary; the svmbofs on this page, however, do not seem to spell anything that might be an English word 

Folio 66r. A small scattering of letters, which again look to me like Greek svmbois. arc to be found in the lower left 
corner of the page near a small picture of a man lying on his back. Above the " Greek" letters is a string of words in the 
Vovnich script. Prof. Richard Salomon of Kcnvon College has suggested a High German interpretation of the extraneous 
svmbois, claiming that they stand for "der musz del", or the mussteil' , referring to an obligatory bequest of household - 
goods from a man to his widow'. 


Folio 66 v. In the lower half of this page (which shows a plant drawing accompanied bv three text paragraphs; there is a 
scribble or doodle that slants downward toward the left. A rough oblong figure sits to the right and above the scrawl. The 
markings here resemble a similar scribble in the center of folio 85-S6v3 fsee below some pontons of the doodle have the 
appearance of Arabic script. 

Folio 85-S6v3. In the center of this cosmological diagram there is another doodle similar to that in folio 66 v, A crude 
circle is bisected by a horizontal line, and the upper half bisected again by a perpendicular; a line of indecipherable scribbling 
something like Arabic script crosses part of this circle and extends to the left of it. 

Folio 87 r. To the left of the lower leaves of the plant drawing is a crude star-like doodle of inrersecong lines 

Folio 1 16v. The several lines of text in a mixture of symbols on the last page of the manuscript have been extensive! v 
studied br many researchers as a possible 'key” to the text. Figure 23 shows several transcriptions of this material made bv 
different students along with a reproduction (admittedly poor! of the photocopy at my disposal. The symbols are verv small 
crabbed, and faint. It is interesting to note the differences among different students' interpretation of these enigmatic lines. 
The numerous ambiguities and obscurities have nor prevented several students from basing extensive theories on their own 
rather arbitrary readings of the tiny, distorted letters. 

Folio gatherings. In the lower corners of certain pages are numbers added in what appears to be a different ink and hand 
These numbers correspond roughly to sets of eight pages. Those discernible in the photocop v I have studied are shown m 
figure 22. with the page number associated with each. The numerals are interesting in themselves, exhibiting some archaic 
forms; they art accompanied bv symbols for Latin abbreviations, one of which, ^ " for *us exact! v resembles j 
common fvmbol in the Voynich script. 

Folio numbering. At some point during the eventful history of this manuscript, someone added numbers m the upper right 
hand corner of the pages. These numbers agree with the present order of the pages, and show gaps where certain pages have 
apparently been lost since the numbering was done but before the finding of the manuscript bv Voynich. Some students have 
dated the folio numbers to the sixteenth or seventeenth century; they may well have been added by someone at Rudolph s 
court. The forms of the numbers do not differ significantly from modern forms. 

Month names in astrological diagrams. The name of a month has been written into the central medallion of each circular 
diagram associated with a recognizable zodiac sign. These month names are considered bv most students to be written m a 
different ink and hand than that of the main text. Figure "10 shows details of these medallions and monrh names. A single 
word in the Vovnich script is seen next to the two scaly fishes of the Pisces medallion (folio 70r21; attempts to identify this 
word with the month name or zodiac sign have so far been fruitless. No one has made any progress, or even, apparently, anv 
determined attempt, to idendfv the language or provenience of the month names, despite the fan that they are among the 
few clearlv recognizable and comprehensible bits of text in the entire manuscript. 

43 Linear Sequences that Look Like "Keys” 

Several pages of the manuscript are provided with columns or circles of single symbols or short words that seem ro be 
arranged in some sequence that may be an index or key. Brumbaugh has exploited these sequences extensively in his theory 
of decipherment (set Section 5,4); according to him, the multiplicity of "keys”, although associated with a deliberate 
attempt at mystification on the pan of the scribe, still provide some valid and useful information about the cipher. Below u a 
list of these, insofar as I can identify them; some of the "key” sequences are also mentioned above under Section 4,2. 

Folio Ir. The two parallel alphabetic sequences in the left and right margins, described above, have been thought to 
function as keys; a suspicion enters mv mind, however, that they are the result of some larcr would-be decipherer s workings 
It is surprising, considering the number of people who must have attempted to read the manuscript at Rudolph's court and 
elsewhere, that there are not far more doodled numbers, letters, and lines on its pages. 

Folio 49v A clearlv discernible verticil list of twemy-six Voynich symbols runs down the left margin of the text 
accompanying a particularly decorative "herbal' folio showing a cvclamen-like plant. Figure 24 shows this sequence, which 
exhibits a partial repetition in three cycles. 

Folio 57 v, Seventeen symbols, some quite complex or unusual in form, are repeated four times around the second 
concentric circle from the outside in a cosmological diagram. The four sequences are shown in parallel in figure 24 This is a 
rare instance of sequences repeating almost exactly in the manuscript; in fra. I believe it is the only such instance. 

Folio 66r, In the left margin is a rather complex sequence of single symbols associated with isolated short words and the 
lines of a text paragraph, all in the Voynich script. Brumbaugh employed these sequences ai "equations " expressing a 
correspondence between the letters and the words (see 5 4 below). As is frequently the case in this manuscript, however, the 


26 


horizontal association of the scattered letters and single words is not verv accurate , and neither is clear! v and consi stench 
related to the lines of the paragraph. 

Folio 69r. Between the points of a central star are six Voynich symbols. 

Folio 76r. A string of nine Voynich symbols is seen in the upper left margin, spaced out vertically in rough association 
with certain lines of a text paragraph. 

To my knowledge, no one other chan Brumbaugh has direcred much attention to these sequences. No consistent alphabetic 
or numeric order can be traced from one to the next. They may be conventional abbreviations standing for sequences of ideas 
or objects known to tht scribe or scribes. Their presence as a salient feature of the text indicates that the writing svstem was 
capable of employing single symbols or pairs of svmbols to stand for some sets of concepts. See figure 24 for examples of 
many of these "key ' sequences 


4-4 Cryptanalytic and Stylistic Attacks on the Text 

Students who have approached the Voynich text from the point of view of the professional cryptanalyst have been Led on 
at firsr by a deceptive surface appearance of simplicity* only to bog down sooner or later in an exasperating quagmire of 
paradoxes and enigmas that reveal themselves one by one as analysis proceeds. Eltzeberh Friedman has provided a dear 
conose %ummarv of the frustrations awaiting the crvpcanaivse in the Vovnich manuscript. I cannot improve on the darit\ . 
compleumess. and succinctness of her remarks, and so will quote them at length in the following paragraphs. 

"WtaE ii ftfieriliv ihr inuiat rnenon of a professional cipher expert to ihr manuicnpt' At first ebnee it looks m thouch it jhuuid he 
*erv c*iy tv &gt;olve. became ih* "ait item* to be in word tenrth* and word repetmons «ar*d our ckarb on practical h every pace 

A single frequent* table mould be made at once of a portion of text . just as Foe did in the Gold Buj; Bur to do that neinutjrev 
deciding brw manr different itmboli there are m the manuscript, and this it neither simple nor easv. For what teems it first ebnee to be j 
single umbol often appears to be a composite made up of perhaps fwo or three symbols 

If a frequence table is made lor a piece of ten amounting to about 500 consecutive words" twhirh come to about 1500 chiranem. it 
presents the character tin r rouph appearance of a frequence table for a simple substitution cipher A few symbols have a yctv hik'h 
frequency; a few hive i verv low frequency; the rest are of varying but medium frequencies. Beude the manv repetitions of single words 
there are also mint repeated sequences of two. three, ur more words 

The first impression, cherefiae. n that here is a simple substitution Cipher, However, the decipherer is doomed to Liter irultftiti'wi when 
no solution based on inch a theitrv is reached Trials in Latin. Greek. German. Italian, etc . vield nothing at all. So maihe it s nut vimpu 
substitution. 

"Bur then the possibility of transposition, of combined substitution -transposition . or of multiple alphabet substitution art also ruled out 
for the reason that there is entirely too much repetition. We find thousands of repetitions ol three-, tour- and five-letter witrti* 
throughout the text. 

For example, in nineteen lines of teat. a. certain three -character group appears nxrv*si* times And in regard to repetition of complete 
words . the whole manuscript is quite homogeneous, the "words in all sections are verv much alike 

’Indeed, sometimes, and nut too rtrelv, one finds the same word" appearing three times in succession, producing lomrthing similar t» 
Gertrude Stem s A rote is a ruse is a rote, , ." Also, there are thousands of cases m which, two words of four, five, or more characters 
differ from each other bvonlv «ie character. as in English, the words strike and stroke. wore and stork 1062 | 

There have been several attempts to anal vie the Voynich texr using computers Unfortunatelv. for a variety of reasons. 
Iirric progress has resulted from these efforts, with the sole exception (to mv knowledge) of the researches of Prescott Currier 
(see Section 6.8 ). Cryptanalytic studies have included monographic, digraphic, and trigraphic frequency counts throughout 
samples of vinous sizes, based on several different transcription alphabets. Reverse alphabetic sorts have been made to srudv 
endings of words, and word indexes have provided an analysis of different occurrences of the same word and a 
comparison of their contexts. The difficulties of arriving at an alphabet, transcribing a sufficiently large wimple of text, and 
gaming access to enough computer time have hampered students in their efforts over the vears. Most of the proposed 
computer srudi es were never earned far enough to result in any solid gain in knowledge. More will be said in Chapter 6 
regarding certain specific computer studies and some methodological considerations relating to the use of computers in 
general. 

While relatively few have had access to computers, manv students have made extensive hand studies of the text, Tihman 
first described the apparent precedence order of characters within words, and demonstrated the preference of certain 
symbols, in certain combinations, for the beginning, middle, or ending portions of words. Petersen made an elaborate and 
complete manual concordance of the text, and studied occurrences of ligatured and compound forms of svmbols. 


4*4*1 Phenomena in the Text Which Mast he Accounted for by Any Theory , 


The following list of characteristics to be explained bv anv good crvptanalvuc theon summarizes the findings ot several 
researchers, notably the Friedmans and Tiltman: it includes alio some observations which 1 have added from mv own stucK 
of the text. 

fl) The basic alphabet of frequently occurring svmbols is small las few as fifteen according to some students and 
probably no more than r went v* Five L 

(2 1 The basic forms are compounded or ligarured to create a Large variety of complex svmbols. 

(3 1 The symbols are grouped into words*' separated bv spaces (although some researchers have expressed doubts 
about the consistency of this spacing i 

\4) The number of different words seems surprisingly limited. 

(3 I The words are short, averaging around four or five svmbob in length, words over seven or eight svmbols Lone 
are rare, as are also words consisting of a single symbol. Even two-letter words are relatively uncommon, i It should be 
pointed out that normal English text also presents an average word- length of about five characters; in English text, however, 
there are many one* and rwo-lcfrcr words, and a great many words of ten to fifteen characters in length, providing a verv 
different pattern from that seen in the Voynich text.) 

t6\ The same word " is frequently repeated two. three, or more times in immediate succession. 

(7 ) Many ' words' ‘ differ from each other bv opiy one or two svmbols. and such 'words often occur in immediate 
succession/ 

18 j Certain svmbob occur characteristically at the beginnings, middles, and ends ol "words . and in certain preferred 
sequences. 

(9i Certain svmbols appear verv rarely, and onlv on certain pages, indicating some special function or meaning 

(10) There arc very few doublets (repetition of the same letter rwice in succession J. and these involve primarily the 
svmbob " " and " * v *\ ocasionally also " ^ ", and "O'". ^ 

lllf Verv few svmbob occur singly las one-letter words") in running text; these are primarily “ C and 9 

U2I "Prefix*', like elements are tacked in front of certain 'words ' that also occur commonly without them; such 
prefixed elements are \ and " 9 * 

i 1 3 1 The svmbol 4^* occurs almost invariably followed bv O". and joined to it bv an extension of the crossbar vt 
the ' " ; the resulting compound svmbol is rarelv seen elsewhere than at rhe beginning of words 


( 14 1 On most herbal folios, the first line of the first paragraph begins with a verv small set of svmbols, pnmanb 
- ff •- and " these are usually immediately followed bv " CT ^ ", " © '* 9 

^ or sr No trace can be found of the alpha bencitv that would be expected if the herbal paragraphs becan 
with the names . ot plants in alphabetical order as was usual in many early herbab. 

(13) Single 'words' occurring as labels next to stars, "drug containers ', plant sketches, or other pictorial elements in 
various drawings verv rarely begin with the four looped svmbob; instead, they often start with " O ", ^ ■ 9 - 

and occasionally ** " and " &lt;T V 


4*4*2 Cryptanalytit Hypotheses, 

In the Vovnich manuscript, we are confronted by a situation with many unknowns. In spite of the diligent and tireless 
efforts of many talented researchers over the half-century since its discovery, we soil have verv few definite facts to reduce 
the large area of uncertainty defined bv these unknowns. We still are ignorant of the underlying language: we have lirde or 
no due to the nature of the cipher, code, or writing system: we do not know when, where, or bv whom rhe manuscript was 
written; we cannot even be certain of the subject marrer, or the purpose for which it was compiled. In the following 
paragraphs, I will attempt to list, as completely as possible, the hypotheses that a conscientious crvptanalvsc might entertain 
regarding the nature of the Vovnich cert. In some cases, information turned up bv researchers can at least partly rule out 
some of these hypotheses, as Elixeberh Friedman has suggested in the passage quoted above. Some theories seem more 
capable than others of explaining the phenomena observed in the text, A systematic consideration of all the possibilities wdt 


On the marter tit repeated wnrtii. j colleague has pointed nut (*■ me that r»u or threr repetitions in sequence nt the same nibble art-mif 
utuirmniim in t.hine*r and in other, umibr Eastern Janauagn This it due in pan ti&gt; the lack of rhe hmcuon nordi such as modal auxiliaries, 
prepositions, arm lei. ttt.. in these idficuaitev and m part to methods ul word budding and cum pound tnx 


28 


serve as j good foundation for the discussion of solution attempts in Chapters 5 and 6 Such a survey will also provide a vivid 
picture of the true magnitude of the problem which this enigmatic manuscript presents ro the crvptanalvit 

The crvptanalvtic possibilities to be dealt with are related to three principal factors, which 1 will designate bv capital 
letters: P. the nature of the underlying plain text; E. the correspondence or substitution between elements or plain text and 
Vovmch script elements; and T, other v a reformations that might have been carried out on the plain text in addition ro 
substitution of Voynich svmbols. In the following paragraphs, several possibilities will be listed under each of these basic 
factors; each such individual hypothesis will be designated by the letter fP. £. or T) followed bv an Arabic numeral. I will 
assume that the reader is familiar with certain basic terminology and concepts of crvpiologv, such as the distinction between 
code and cipher, substitution and transposition. These concepts have been clearly defined and explained in mam cjsiU 
obtainable general works on crvptanaksts. 

P. The Nature of the Plain Text. 

P.l Normal Lao n text. 

P.2 Normal text in some other^naturaiianguage.^. 

P.3 Code or synthetic language with a mixture of ideographic and natural language characteristics ie.e,. grammatical 
endings added to code svmbols i. 

PA A pureiv ideographic system like picrographs. with virtually no features of natural language preserved 
E. The Nature of the Subsniution. 

J:. i One plain text symbol is replaced bv one Vovmch symbol. 

E,2 One plain text symbol is replaced bv two I three I Vovmch symbols, but always bv the same number of svmbols 

E.3 Two ( three), but always the same number of plain text svmbols are replaced bv one Vovnich svmbol. 

E.4 Two (three* plain text symbols are replaced by two (three) Vovnich symbols. 

E.5 Mixed length units li.c.. one. two. and three .letter strings) are involved in either or both plain text and Vovmch 
script, 

E.6 Each plain text unit has a set of variant or alternative Voynich symbol counter pans, from which the scribt could 
choose at will, 

E.7 Whole words or concepts are represented bv single Vovnich svmbols or bv mixeddength Vovnich strings i as in j 
shorthand ), 

E.S Polva Iphabettc substitution, or the cyclic use of a series of substitution alphabets according to some rule 
T Transformations Other Than Substitution. 

T. 1 No plain text letters dropped, added, or moved. 

T.2 Vowels dropped. 

T.3 Words abbreviated arbitrarily, and represented only bv certain letters. 

T.4 “Dummy" characters, or nulls inserted into the text.’ 

T.5 Letters or syllables transposed within words (as in Pig Latin). 

T.6 Letters anagram med or transposed over longer stretches of text, 

T.7 Plain text concealed in a much longer "dummy* or "cover text, most of which is meaningless. 

T.8 A Tnthemian or Baconian system, involving the use of some binary or ternary characteristic (dosed or open 
letters, tails up or tails down; ligaturing or lade of it; etc..) as the true message carrying feature in a manner similar to the 
dots" and "dashes" of Morse code, applied to a "cover" text or "carrier" text which is meaningless in itself 
As will be shown in Chapter 9. ail of the above possibilities were known and used bv early practitioners of secret writing, 
well within the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Roger Bacon mentions a number of them man often-cited passage m his 
work entitled "De Mirabili Potestate Arm et Naturae" (Bacon 1859) The methods he lists include made-up alphabets, 
geometric figures combined with dots, shorthand C ars noiona ' or Tvronian Hand), and dropping vowels from the 
plaintext. In alchemy treatises attributed to him. Bacon is also thought by some to have employed anagramming. simple 
substitution (one plain text character to one cipher character), and concealment of a short message within a much longer 
meaningless "cover" text. 

Using the scheme of individual hypotheses designated by letters and numbers presented above, we can set up a large 
number of compound hypotheses embodying various choices in vinous combinations. J will nor attempt to hst all of this verv 

In notes mi4c bv Mils NHL companion of Mrs Vormdi. she reports that John Manly had expressed his optnmn in a later m M(, Vovnich Ji led, 
March 20. 1920 ih*t the text of iht manuscript represents j simple cipher disguised bv the use of nulli. In another letter tu VC'jfliam R NewMd at 
about the unit date. Manly stated t according to Miss Nitli that frequent v counts he had made based on eight pages of ten, sho wed a comparanveK 
si in pie cipher disiruised bv extensive use of nulls* 


29 


Urge ser of possibilities; instead. I will mention a few that seem to be ruled out bv the evidence, or at least rendered relatively 
unlikely, and a few others that seem more consistent with what we know of the text and thus more worthv of further studv. 

Hypotheses Rendered Unlikely by the Evidence. 

Simple Substitution on in Otherwise Unaltered Natural Language Text, As Elixebeth Friedman and others have 
observed, the text probably does not represent ordinary Latin or anv other natural language enciphered by simple one-to-one 
substitution of Voynich symbols for single tetters (that is. in terms of our scheme. P.l or P.2 and E.l and T. 1 L The short 
words, the many sequential repetitions, the rarity of one- or rwo4etter words, the rarity of doublets 1 doubled fetters), all 
militate against simple lubscniaon. So also docs the strange lack of parallel context surrounding different occurrences of the 
"same" word as shown by word indexes. In the words of several researchers, 'the text just doesn't act like natural language 

An Ideographic or Symbolic Representational Scheme. At the other extreme, a srstem involving our hypothesis P.4 u 
purely ideographic or pictographic system, preserving no trace of endings, grammatical forms, or anv of the structure o* 
alphabetic strings) is equally unlikely. This possibility is ruled out by the salient beginning, middle, and ending structure 
demonstrated by Tilcman and since repeatedly confirmed The prefix-like en Does and the obvious similannes between words 
also indicate that there is some degree of language-like structure, involving umts smaller than whole words or ideas, tn the 
Voynich text. 

PolvaJphabetit Substitution. Hypotheses involving E.S (the cyclic use of several different subset cuoon alphabets according 
to some rule) is rived out, as noted bv EUzebeth Friedman, because there is far too much structured repetition in the text 
Polyalphabetic iv? terns, like the well-known Vigcnerc table, are explicitly designed to obscure the manv patterns and 
repetitions in natural text which provide helpful break -in poinu for the would-be decipherer. The frequency counts of 
occurrences of Voynich characters throughout a sample of text are also too “rough'’ — that is. some characters are infrequent, 
while others are very common — for a polyalphabetic system, which obviouslv. with its many alphabets, tends to "'flatten 
oui“ the frequency distribution for the text as a whole. 

Transposition Systems. Systems involving anagram mmg or transposing letters over arbitrary sequences of text (T.6) are 
also unlikely for a number of reasons; first, the many repetitions of similar strings of characters in dose proximity fe.g., 

-JoYr*c9 +ofl\-r&lt;j “ lnd re «««*• the numcrous lhort 

words used as labels or captions; and third, the difficulty, ambiguity, and tedium of such methods for so Urge a volume of 
text, together with the difficulty of reading and deciphering what was probablv a reference work to be consulted bv more 
than one person. 

Some Hypotheses Worthy of Further Consideration. Having narrowed the field somewhat bv setting aside some of the 
possibilities as unlikely, we can concentrate our attention on certain others that seem more promising. I would like, first, to 
suggest certain general considerations that appeir relevant to the nature of the wrmng system in the Vovmch text. Whatever 
method of concealment was used would have had to be relatively easy to empiov and to remember. The sheer volume of text 
(estimated at 250,000 characters) militates against any elaborate, multi -stage process such as that proposed bv New- bold. 
The ease and naturalness and the cursive quality of the writing also argues against any tedious and involved sequence of 
enciphering operations (unless, of course, we assume that the ennre manuscript had been copied from an earlier original ). 

The recent research of Prescon Currier (ice Section 6,S below) indicates quite dearly that there were at least two different 
scribes or scholars who worked on different folios of the manuscript. This implies that the system had to be such as to permit 
its joint use by several persons — a very important new bit of information. As has apparently been assumed without question 
bv most students, the script was almost certainly written from left to right; this is shown by the clockwise progression of 
circular diagrams, the presence of starting markers on the left, the slant of the writing around circles, and the arrangement of 
lines on a page. Finally, it seems reasonable to me that there must have been other documents written in this script, and also 
one or more code books or dictionaries in use among the small secret society of scholars who employed the system. There is 
always a chance that such materials will turn up some day to throw some new light on the enigma. Considering these general 
factors and what is known about the behavior of characters in the text, the hypotheses below seem in mv opinion, most likely 
to repav further investigation. 

Laun Text With Vowels Dropped. Dropping vowels from Latin produces text having very different character iso cs from 
those of normal Latin Text. Single Latin letters may be represented by single Voynich symbols, or. more likely, bv mixed- 
length units; possibly variants a choice of more than one Vovmch svmbol to stand for a given Latin symbol) are also 
included, as well as nulls (dummy, meaningless letters chosen from a small set of alternatives and inserted irregularly 
throughout the text). Such a concealment system may be represented in our scheme of hypotheses as fP. 1 and T.2 and (E.l 
or E.5 ) and possibly also E.6 and T.4 ). These combined operations could all be carried out easily, naturally, and rapidly bv a 


scribe after some praaice and familiarity with the system. The resulting text would be verr difficult to decipher for anyone 
unfamiliar with the method, and relatively easy for the initiate. A problem arises in dropping vowels from Latin, in that 
many important small words like "de" and “ad'\ "ef and "ut'\ 'sif and 'est'* become indistinguishable. and some words 
consisting only of a single vowel disappear entirely. This might not be a serious problem for readers and writers who knew 
what (he text was about and were closely familiar with it. 

Abbreviated Latin Words, Conventional Latin abbreviations, represented bv mixed-length Voynich character strings or 
code -‘like entities, possibly with the added complications of variants and nulls, presents another likdv possibility ( P. 1 and To 
and E + 5 or E.7; optionally also E,6 and T.4), This, too, would be easv to learn and to remember, and easv to read lor the 
inmate within the secret circle, but highly difficult for anvone outside it to penetrate, 

Latin Text. Enciphered bv Simple Substitution. Concealed in a Longer Dummy Message. This hypothesis iP.l and E l 
and T.7) would explain the many strange repetitions of highly similar words in close succession; one of rhe words represents 
a pan of the actual message, while the rest are nonsense sequences made up, like meaningless babblmg, and inserted to 
conceal the true cipher string. The scribe, faced with the task of thinking up a Urge number of such dummy sequences, 
would naturally tend to repeat parts of neighboring strings with various small changes and additions to fill out the line until 
the next message -bearing word or phrase. This theory would also explain the frequent illogicality and lack of consistent 
sequential structure in stretches of text which has so frustrated irudenn. 

A Svnthetic Language or Code fP.3 and E.7; optionally also E.5 and E,6 and T.4). The most likek hypothesis in im 
opinion involves a simple code based on a small glossary of a few hundred Latin words related to plants, median*, 
astronomy, weather, and other topics of interest to the scribes of the manuscript. The root or base forms would be 
represented bv one. two. or three Vovnich Symbols standing for a page number or column number on a page, or tor a 
philosophical subject category as was usual in early universal or am final languages. (See Section 9.3-1 Endings or 
grammatical forms could then be represented by the strings of symbols in ctrutn preferred orders noted bv Tikman and 
others at the ends of words. This, too, was a common feature of early svnthetic languages. The addition of mixed -length 
variants for bases and affixes, and the insertion of nulls, all common practices in earlv codes used bv the Catholic Church, 
would provide a complex concealment system exceedingly hard to penetrate for the outsider, while still verv easv for the 
inmate to use. With some practice, it could be memorised almost Like a natural language, especially if its basic vocabulary 
was as small as seems likely from the evidence, 

A svstem of this kind would require one or more copies of a code book or dictionary to be consulted bv users of the 
language. In Seaton 9.2, an early Vatican code (Silvester 1526) which cxactlv fits the above description will be discussed in 
some derail. Currier's findings concerning the differences in certain charaaer frequencies and combinations betw een samples 
of text in two different " hands'' are highly significant in this regard. A possible explanation is that one scribe used certain 
variants in preference to others, or employed the svstem of endings" a little differently, in contrast ro the practice of another 
scribe. These and other hypotheses will be discussed further from various points of view in Chapters 5. 6, and 9. 


31 


Chapter 5 

Major Claims of Decipherment 

The survey to be presented here will be quite brief* except m the case of the most recent claim, bv Robert S. Brumbaugh ot 
Yale University. The solutions put forward bv Newbold* Feeiv. and Strong have been thoroughly dealt with bv other writers, 
in treatments published in relatively accessible -source*. T will -provide only a rapid sketch of the main points regarding their 
work* for the sake of completeness, for students new to the problem* and for methodological reasons. 

5.J Newbold 

Pro:. Wilham R. Newbold was among the first scholars to whom Wilfrid Vovnich gave copies of the manuscript simr: 
after us discovery, in the hope of getting it deciphered and translated. Newbold* a student of medieval philosophy and 
science, published hts first presentation in 1921. He worked on the manuscript and on other alchemical texts attributed to 
Roger Bacon for several more years before his sudden death. Worksheets and notes ot hts research were edited and published 
bv his friend and literary executor. Prof. Roland G. Kent (Newbold and Kent 19281. Newbold was familiar with the system 
of esoteric mystical philosophy developed bv the medieval Jews in Spain and known as the Cabala (or Kabbalah K He studied 
the sentences in a mixture of scripts on folio 1 I6v, and was immediately struck bv a phrase "michi * . . dabas 
mult as * * . portas'' (as he read it), which he translated 'Thou wait giving me manv gates' , (For several different readings ot 
folio 1 16v, see figure 23 )- The word "gates" (Larin "portae" or "portas") was used in the Cabala, according to Newbold. to 
refer to all possible combinations of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, taken two at a time Assuming from the outset, 
following Voynich, that Roger Bacon was the manuscript s author. Newbold brought to bear evidence that Bacon **is 
familiar with certain aspens of Cabalistic lore; he rites references in Bacon s Greek Grammar and his fragmentary writings 
on Hebrew (Bacon 1902L as well as his comments concerning concealed writing (for which see Section 4.4.2 above, as 
evidence of this famiiiarirv. 

Starting with this due* Newbold examined some other works on the subject of alchemv attributed to Bacon* and claimed 
to have discovered a cipher used by Bacon for concealing messages within innocent-appearing Latin text ithe method 1 have 
designated T.7 in Chapter 4). He maintained that a variant of this method had been employed in the Vovnich manuscript as 
well. Thus* Newbold ascribes two different, but related* cipher systems to Bacon: first* a 'Latin text' cipher from the 
alchemv treatises, and second, a more complex "shorthand cipher' used in the Vovnich manuscript. 

5. L / The Latin Text Cipher. 

In the Latin alchemical manuscripts, a message was hidden, according to Newbold, within Latin words so chosen and 
arranged as to appear to be a treatise on alchemy or on a related topic. Alchemy texts were always expected to be mysterious 
and nonsensical to the uninitiated (and. one suspects* to many would -be initiates as well) : such a work would thus provide an 
ideal cover " for a secret message. Each pair of visible Latin letters in the cover text stood, in New bold's view based on iht 
Cabalistic "gates' for a single underiving plaintext letter. In this svsrem, 484 letter-pain f twenty -two letters taken two at j 
umc) were generated, so that each of the twenty-two letters of the plaintext alphabet could be represented bv any of rwentt - 
rwo variants"* or alternative cipher pain. A restriction was placed bv Newbold on this large number of alternatives, such 
that pairs chosen to substitute for a plaintext letter in a word must have the first member of one pair the same as the lasr 
member of the preceding pair. For example, if "uni us" were to be enciphered, it might be represented as "or-ri4t-tu-uf ; 
the doubled letters would then be dropped, giving oritur"* a good Larin word (see Newbold and Kent 1928. p. 5 3 ff and 
Manly 193L p, 34 ff for a fuller explanation)* Added complexities were introduced to provide a cover text that appeared to 
be acceptable Latin and would not (at least in an alchemy text) arouse suspicion. These added steps involved a manv-man\ 
substitution* and on top of that, a rearrangement or anagramming of letters within passages of fiftv*five or one hundred and 
ten characters of text (our method T.6 L 


33 


5 . L2 The Shorthand Cipher, 

As described bv Newbold (Newbold and Kent 1928, p. 106 l there were six steps to be followed in deciphering the 
Vovmch text; 

1 Transliteration identifying the shorthand characters, and transliterating them in order. 

2 Syllabification: doubling ah but the first and last characters and arranging the resulting stnnc in pairs with the first 
member of each the tame as the last member of the preceding pair 

3- Commutation: In anv pair where the second member is one of the ' commuting set ' C O. N\ M. L . T. A* Q 
change the first member according to a “conversion alphabet* provided bv Newbold. Where the first member is j 
commuting letter, change the second bv a * reversion alphabet* provided: where both are commuting letters, chance both, 
each bv the indicated alphabet. 

4. Translation; assigning to the commuted pairs their alphabetic values (bv lookup in a table) 

3. Reversion: Changing ' Alphabetic, values! m' phonetic xalucs" (the exact nature of this step is not clear 3 

6 Recomposition: Anagramming the letters to produce meaningful text. 

The shorthand * referred to in step 1 was supposedly based on an ancient Greek system of abbreviations, and wjs to be 
applied to each character of the Vornith script as inspected under a reading glass and broken up into mam tmv component 
curves and lines. Extensive tables are provided m the back of the book to enable the student to cam out all the necessary 
reversions, convei sions. translations, and so forth. 

Newbold and Kent provide good illustrations of a number of folios from the manuscript, chosen from various classes ot 
drawings: decipherments of the text on these folios are also presented* which bear little or no relation to the pictures For 
example, a tale concerning two ancient Romans ts read on a page with an astrological drawing (folio 72vJ, Human figure 
folios are read as describing procreative or gynecological matters, with at least some apparent justification (ova. fallopian 
tubes, spermatozoa, etc.) in the drawings. This seems to be a frequent reaction on the part of modern students to the naked 
female figures on folios 75 ff. Other drawings are taken as recording the appearance of a comet (folio 7lv). an observation 
of a spiral nebula (folio 68v3l. and an annular eclipse (folio 67v2). 

The claims of Newbold were hailed with great enthusiasm bv Vovmch and many others, who wrote numerous reviews 
and commentaries (Bird 1921. Garland 1921, McKeon 1928). Roger Bacon enjoyed a spectacular, if brief, moment in the 
sun. while he was credited with the invention of the compound microscope and telescope, and the anticipation ot manv 
twentieth -century scientific discoveries. Catholic writers exulted in oriumph on the one hand over what rhev saw as a 
vindication of medieval scholastic philosophy, and frU over one another on the other hand in their haste to apologize lor. 
excuse, and minimize the persecution and neglect inflicted upon the thirteenth -centurv "forerunner of modern science ' bv 
his superiors in the Franciscan Order (Reville 192L Walsh 1921 J. Even a number of prominent Baconian experts and 
specialists in medieval philosophy accepted Newbold s claims uncritically, and manfully strove to assimilate the indigestible 
anachronisms into their knowledge of Bacon 1 work and thought (Carton 1929. Gilson 1928). Some less credulous scholars 
were taking a harder look at Newbold's theories, and expressing their doubts (Steele 1928: Thorndike 1921* 1929: 
Salomon 1934). 

At the same time another scholar* Prof. John M. Manly, a professor of English ac the University of Chicago, had 
interested himself in the manuscript, and had been (according to his own words I 'dabbling'' with it for several vears at odd 
times . Manly was a friend of Newbold's, and had corresponded with him: Newbold had discussed his methods and findings 
with Manly over some time, In 1921. Manly published articles in Harpers Monthly Magazine (192 lb) and in the American 
Revieu of Renews (1921a). expressing a mildly favorable or neutral reaction, but also giving voice to some doubts and 
cautions. After Newbold's death in 1926. and the posthumous publication of his work in the book edited bv Kent. Manlv 
published another, much more outspoken article in Speculum (19311. emphatically disproving and rejecting Newbold s 
theories. 

This is how Manly expresses his views in the Speculum article: "The more I studied the nature and operation of the cipher 
system attributed to Bacon, the more clearly did 1 see that it was incapable of being used as a medium of communication* and 
was indeed not Bacon's work but the subconscious creation of Professor Newbold's enthusiasm and ingenuity 1 told 
Professor Newbold mv conclusions and gave my reasons for them in several letters* , , /" (1931, p. 347), Manly goes on to 
explain that, while he would not have chosen to make a point of attacking his late friend's work, he felt that it was necessary 
to set the record straight in view of the unquestioning acceptance accorded to the theory by so manv prominent authorities 
He says, "One of the most eminent philosophers of France, Professor Gilson, chough bewildered bv the method, has 
accepted the results; Professor Raoul Carton, the well-known Baconian specialist, in rwo long articles, accepts both method 


34 


and results with enthusiasm; and American chemists and biologists have been si mi lari v impressed. The interests of scientific 
truth therefore demand a careful examination of the claims of the Newbold cipher" Ip 347*. (See Carton 1929. Gilson 
1928*) 

Manly' makes the following flat statement at the outset: *Tn my opinion* the New bold claims are e^tr-clv baseless and 
should be definitely and absolutely rejected" fp* 347)* He explains that the tiny Lines and curves Newbold saw as microscopic 
Greek shorthand symbols were due simply to cracking of the ink on the rough surface of the parchment* thus vitiating step l 
of Newbolds method. A second telling attack is focussed by Manly on the sixth and final step, involving anagram mine 
letters in stretches of fifty-five or one hundred and ten text characters. He demonstrates the amazing number of reasonable 
sentences, even including rhyming poetry, that can be generated from a single short passage bv anagramming. For instance, 
he considers a sentence in one of the aiehemv treatises attributed to Bacon: "innpium quaedam caret quaestiunes Bernard* 
cum sun responsionibus et e«. * * .** From this sentence. Newbold had obtained the following: "Dc via et terra et coelis 
despioc mixta prinapia lumejnj"- Since each letter of the original sentence, in Newbold s ' Latin cipher system, can have a 
number of alternative equivalents, a huge number of possibilities present themselves for selection even before the 
anagramming begins. This is the sentence for which William F. Friedman, working in cooperation with Manlv to test 
Newbold’ s theory, obtained the anagram "Paris is lured with loving Vestals. . . /*, simply bv choosing a different set of 
equivalents and a different arrangement among the many possibilities. For a full discussion of the problem oi anagram mine 
and the aitfalis of Ncwbold s theory, see Manlv 1931. pp. 330 ff and Friedman and Friedman 1959. 

Man. v s article in Speculum succeeded in laying to rest Newbold's theories, and Friar Bacon returned again to his 
accustomed scholastic obscurity* consigned to even deeper darkness in an over -reaction on the part of some modern scholars 
against his illusory role as originator of twentieth -century scientific instruments, and observer of astronomical and 
gynecological secrets 600 years in advance of their appointed time. (Note, in particular* the savagely critical and 
"debunking " attitude toward Bacon expressed bv Thorndike 1916 and 1923-195SJ It seems probable also that the 
controversy over Newbold’s work, the amount of publicity it received, and its complete destruction so closely following upon 
its uncritical acceptance by majiy prominent experts who presumably should have known better, caused many, scholars to 
wash their hands of the manuscript and to steer clear of anv serious involvement with the problem it presents. If a scholar of 
Newbold’s impressive reputation and knowledge of medieval philosophy could be made to appear so deluded and foolish 
after so many rears of painstaking effort, it is easy to understand the reluctance of other scholars to risk their ow n reputations 
and peace of mind on the problem. 

5-2 Feely 

Eluebeth Friedman 11962) describes Fedy and his claim to a solution of the manuscript as follows ’’In 1943* j 
R ochester lawyer. Joseph Martin Fee) v* published a book entitled Roger Bacon's Opher: The Right Key Found. Feelv was 
the author oi Shakespeare's Maze t Deciphering Shakespeare, and other items catalogued in the Friedman Collection under 
the heading Cryptologic Follies. " However unacceptable his results may have been, he started his researches in a sensible 
manner, according to his description of them in his book: coming upon the manuscript through the pictures in the Newbold* 
Kent book* he did frequency' counts on Roger Bacon’s Latin in several works, including De Perspectna fa work on optics* 
and Commuma Naiurahttm l concerning natural science). 

Feely noted that the leaders"’ fby which he apparently meant the highest-frequencv letters) m Bacon's Latin comprised 
the letters "E. I, T, A, N, U. S ’, and he attempted to make a parallel analysis of lener frequencies in the Vovmch text* on an 
assumption of simple substitution four hypothesis P. 1 and £. I and T. 1). From these studies he moved quicklv on to attempts 
at cribbing" various words that might be related to the drawings and their accompanying text in the manuscript He 
remarks with obvious exasperation chat the Latin in Bacon’s manuscripts was highly abbreviated: he estimates the text to 
have been reduced in length by thirty-five percent through this practice. He comments, also with evident annoyance, upon 
the differences between medieval and classical Latin. These difficulties apparently frustrated and hindered his statistical 
researchers to a considerable extern, and perhaps drove him to the much eaiier and less demanding approach of guessing at 
possible "cribs" in the text* 

Fed vs attempts at cribbing apparently met with some success. On folio 78r, shown in Newbold and Kent ( 1928* Plate 
V), Feely found his first break into the text. This page is one of those showing nude female figures bathing in pooh or tubs of 
liquid. Feely assumed that two cloud- or grape -duster objects at the top corners of the page (see figure 1 5 for a detail, of one„ 
of these &gt; were ovaries" and that the channels leading down from them and joining m the middle of the page were 
transmitting "ova ' into the two "sacks ' below. In the " sacks," according to Feelv. the "ova " were shown as female figures 
standing in the liquid. There are "labels" in the Voynich script next to each cluster, the sections of pipe conducting the 


35 


stream of mvstenous Jubilances from them, and the pooh into which thev pour. Feelv obtained his first "dews &lt;as he likes 
to call the results of his cribbing) bv a studv of these labels and an attempt to assume various Lmn words thev might 
represent. Figure 25 shows the results he obtained from these initial researches, 

His initial "dews' provided Feely with a number of letter substitutions for common symbols in the Vovnich script, w hich 
he then employed m an effort to puzzle out the remainder of the text on the same page. It should be noted that he at no time 
had access to a complete photocopy of the manuscript; he carried out all his work on the illustrations in Newbold and Kent 
1928. The plaintext which he obtained was a crude, abbreviated pseudo- Latin, which he translated 10 produce English text 
on gynecological topics for folio 78r. On folio 68v&gt; (Newbold and Kent 1928. Plate XXII). he claimed to have found 
Greek words, and to have deciphered a mysterious reference to a statue of Memnon (Feely 1943. p 37 h On other folios. 
Feelv claimed to have found the personal diarv of a scientist observing living cells under magnification the informal 
jottings" of an carlv researcher, hidden in cipher from the hostile eyes of religious authorities 
Although he hedged a bit at coming out flatly in favor of Roger Bacon as author of this scientific diary. Feelv maintained 
that his decipherment tended to support and confirm Bacon- s authorship. Figure 25 shows the alphabets he developed as 4 
result of his studies (probably by successively cribbing and then guessing at letters to fill in the gaps, forcing his assumptions 
until he produced something like Linn. etc., in a cut -and- try fashion). Like manv other students, he saw the Vovmch script 
as containing manv compound symbols built up from simpler forms Unfortunately for Feelv. however, no other student has 
accepted his soiui.on as valid. Tiitman. summing up the general opinion, dismisses Feelv s efforts as follows His 
unmethodical method produced text in unacceptable medieval Latin, in unau then tic abbreviated forms" t 1908. p,6&gt;. 

5. 3 Strong 

Professor Leonell C Strong, a highiv respected medical scientist in the field of cancer research at Yale University, became 
interested in the Voynich manuscript when he saw O "Neill's article f 1944) dating the manuscript alter 149?. He took up 
the riddle of the enigmatic book in the context of a long-enduring interest in Renaissance literature. Over a five-year period, 
he attempted without success to obtain copies of the text for study. He was forced, finally, to carry out his analyses in the 
same wav as Feely had. on the basil of illustrations of individual folios in published works concerning the manuscript In due 
course, he published a brief article claiming a solution to the mystery (19451. His decipherment was based on what has since 
been termed a "peculiar double system of arithmetical progressions of a multiple alphabet. indicating chat the Vuvnich 
manuscript author was familiar with ciphers described bv Tnthemius. Porta, and Seleni" iMcKaig nd. p. 49i. 

Strong s decipherment resulted in what he claimed to be a form of medieval English; he attributed the manuscript to one 
Anthonv Ascham, brother of the better -known Roger Aseham or Askham. a tutor to the children of the Roval House ui 
Tudor in the sixteenth century. Anthony was a physician and astrologer; he published several almanacs, a treatise on 
astronomv. and .an herbal lAskbam 1548a. 1548b. 1550. 1552. 155J). As described by NfcKaig in.d., p. 49). Strongs 
efforts produced text presenting "an extremely candid discussion of women's ailments and practical matters of the conjugal 
bed — you might call it a sixteenth -century equivalent of the Kinsey Report". He identified an herbal contraceptive among its 
recipes, and ran a laboratory experiment to test the effectiveness of the prescription for that purpose The ingredients 
comprised pitch from the nit bark of pine trees, honey, and "oil of spindle. 1 * Strong claimed that the oil of spindle was found 
in his experiment to have caused spermatozoa to lose their motility, thereby verifying its effectiveness as the active ingredient 
of the contraceptive (Strong and McCauley 1947, p, 9001. The details of his crvptanalvtic work and his merhod of 
decipherment, however, have apparently never been explained, and remain problematical 

Strong s plaintext, of which he provides several examples in his articles (Strong 1945. Strong and McCaulev 1947 j, has 
been rejected bv other scholars as completely unacceptable for medieval English. The reader mav arrive ai his own 
conclusions from the following sample: "When skuge of run e-bag rip. sco uogon kum sli of sc mosure- issue ped-stans sku- 
bent, stokked kimbo-elbow crawknoi. This astonishing string of letters is translated bv Strong thus: "When the contents of 
the veins rip (or tear the membranes l the child comes slyly from the mother issuing with the leg -stance skewed and bent 
whik the arms, bent at the elbow, are knotted {above the head) like the legs of a crawfish." (Strong 1945. p. 60S.) To m\ 
mind, at least, this seems a highly unlikclv thing for any writer of any age to have said, whether in cipher or not. It seems 
strange to me, also, that so many students have become obsessively preoccupied with gynecological or sexual interpretations 
of the text. The presence of the scattering of quite unexceptionable 1 matronlv little nude figures on a small proportion of folios 
seems to me an entirely insufficient justification for this obsession. 

Nothing further has been heard from Dr. Strong in support of his theories, to mv knowledge, even though the Vovmch 
manuscript has now been accessible to scholars at Strong s own University, Yale, for a number of vears According to 
Eltzrbeth Friedman, "experts said that what he produced was not medieval English. As for his cipher "method . he said little 
about it. but what he did sav made no sense to crvptoiogiscs ' ( 19621. 

36 


5 . 4 Brumbaugh 

Robert 5. Brumbaugh, a professor of medieval philosophy at Yale University, became interested in the Vovmch 
manuscript during the thirties, and when it was donated bv H. P. Kraus to Yale, he was drawn bv an irresistible impulse 
to look at if (Brumbaugh 1975. p. 348). He was also struck bv O' Neill's identification of American plants in the drawings 
(1944). Brumbaugh published an article in Speculum (1974) announcing that he had solved the mvsterv. and had read 
some labels on plant pictures in the pharmaceutical folios as well as what he refers to as star maps from folio ^5 orf i 19~ V 
p, 348). He also states that he has dea phered the name of Roger Bacon in the "kev ' sentences on the last pace He regards 
the manuscript as a deliberate forgery for the purpose of fooling Emperor Rudloph 11 ot Bohemia into parting with the large 
sum of money he paid for it. 

Scaring that the complete solution will take a lot more study. Brumbaugh still claims that extensive work with a section 
on astrology, with some botanv. and frequence studies of samples throughout the text show that my decipherment is correct 
( 1975. p, 348). He makes tons id cn We-ttse of like sequences of symbols in the margins of folios lr. l T r, 49v. oor. 
and 76r. and in the second ring of 57 v. as well as the sentences on 1 16v; these sequences, while to some extent deliberately 
misleading, sail provide aid in penetrating the cipher, according to Brumbaugh. The text on folio 1 16v Brumbaugh finds to 
be enciphered using what he calls, without further explanation, a standard thirteenth &lt;enturv cipher' f 19^5, p he 

sees confirmation for this in the paired sequences in left and right margins of folio lr. in which he finds a monoalphabetu 
substitution of two normal alphabets, with "a" of one set against "d" of the other. Using this cipher, and some 
rearrangement of syllables, Brumbaugh obtains "RODGD BACON” from a portion of folio ll6v which he reads us 
"MICHI CON OLADA BA' (note that this is the beginning of the same text string that Newbold read as "M1CH1 
DAB AS MULT AS . . PORT AS") He suggests that the name was * planted " in such a manner as to be easilv seen tn 
Rudolph s experts and thus to attract and delude them into accepting the anrihunon of the manuscript to Bacon. 

On folio 66r. Brumbaugh sees a set of "formulae in the words and letters scattered down the right margin, these 
formulae, he suggests, serve to equate symbols to other symbols bv a son of "crvptanthmetic." of which he provides several 
examples (1975. pp 350-351). I must confess that, while those he explains are convincing enough, the rest of the 
formulae” remain somewhat mysterious to me m the absence of further clarification. Using these equations' and the 
recoveries of labels for plants ( which he "cribbed ' bv exploiting word patterns with repeating letters such as p and e in 
"pepper." "pa" in "papaver.” etc.), he sets up a four-bv-mne table of correspondences: he savs that this table is similar tu 
a standard alchemist * or astrologer s cipher, well known m the trade” ( 1975, p. 35 1 ), and he finds among the text of 1 1 b\ 
the words quadnx nomx' which he sees as referring to this four-bv-ninc structure. Figure 2b shows the cipher box 
Brumbaugh recovered it. 

All the Vovmch svmbols. Brumbaugh suggests, stand for forms of the numerals zero through nine tor one throueb mnt. 
the function of zero; if anv. is not made dear in hts presentation). The encipherment, as he sees it. is a mo-step operation, 
which first replaced Letters bv numerals using the four-bv-nine box. collapsing the letters of the alphabet onto the nine digits, 
and then substituted choices among several different fanciful designs for each numeral in order to conceal their identity 
designs chosen from modern and archaic numeral forms. Greek and Latin letters, and several cursive compendia” ( 1975. p 
35 3). It will be noted that this process involves multiple variants in both the Vovmch script and the plaintext Decipherment 
involves first recognizing the numeral underlying one of its variant forms in the Vovmch script, then writing under tt the 
cwq. three, or four possible choices of plaintext correspondences, when this has been done for a word, a pronounceable 
sequence of letters is selected from among the choices. 

An example of the application of this method to a portion of folio 1 16v will serve as an illustration of the procedure 
Brumbaugh singles out a sequence of eight Voynich svmbols from rhe mixed text on this page. | use preceding a phrase that 
he reads as High German: "valsch ubren so rum ga nichr and translates as the above is false so do not take it 
Identifying the eight Vovmch svmbols with numerals according to the correspondences he has set up {which he does not 
explain anywhere in his papers except in verv fragmentary form), he obtains the digits "0 2 0 2 7 3 3 9” Assigning to these 
their multiple plaintext equivalents from the mne*bv-fotir box, he produces the following: 

0 202 733 9 

A B A B G C C I 

J K j K P L L . 

V R V R Y W W -US 


37 


He selects among the few pronounceable alternatives * AKABYLLUS. ARAKYLLUS, AKARYCCUS. L r RUBYLLL T S. 
ARABYCCUS, etc..) the word ' ARABYCCUS”. which he sees as a reference to the Arabic numerals underlying the cipher 
In his first article f 1974), he presents a number of other examples of his method drawn from plant labels on pharmaceutical 
folios. In most cases, the choice among pronounceable possibilities ts quite limited, a phenomenon that lends credence to the 
theory. 

The plaintext produced by Brumbaugh s decipherment is described by him as 'an artificial language, based on Latin, but 
not very firmly based there: its spelling is phonetically impressionistic: some sample passages seem solely repetitive padding 
To add to the decipherer s problems, 'the upper cipher key changes slightly every eight pages ' 1 1975. p&gt; 354). Brumbaugh 
asserts, plausiblv enough, that such ambiguities, while rendering « cipher system unsuitable for modern military use. were 
customary and expected in magical, astrological and alchemical texts of the times in question. 

Tiitman (1975) makes these critical comments regarding Brumbaugh s theories: '"The idea that the manuscript is a 
forgery is not original to him. I suggested it as an uncomfortable possibility tn 19)1 . ... He claims that all the symbols in 
the script are really digits in variant forms and that the kry is a fro* providing single digit substitution for letters . . . i.e. each 
digit represents two or three letters .... All this is so ambiguous that it can only be justified by the production of a great deal 
of confirmatory evidence, but he supplies hardly any evidence at all aid 1 remain quite unconvinced .... Brumbaugh ts not 
alone in assuming the symbols to be numbers in various forms. This has been suggested several times. ' 

Mv opinion on a careful study of Brumbaugh"! two published papers is chat his theories are quire plausible on the face of 
such evidence as lie presents. His proposals are based in. and explain, more of the observed phenomena in the manuscript and 
what is known of its history than chose of anv other decipherer. I have made two painstaking attempts to reconstruct as manv 
as possible of the variant forms for numerals he mentions in his articles, tn so far as l can guess at them from his brief and 
frequentK cryptic references. From the fragmentary set of correspondences I havt thus obtained. J have attempted some 
decipherments of other plant labels and isolated text strings wuh mixed results. A lot of them are meaningless, so far as I can 
sec, and some are suggestive of Latin or pseudo-Larin words; many are very similar (as would be expected from the known 
repetitiveness of the text). There is fust enough plausibility in the process to lead one on. but not enough to leave one 
satisfied. Figure 26 shows my very conjectural attempt to reconstruct Brumbaugh's variants with their correspondence eo the 
rune-by-four matrix, and a sample of his decipherments of plant labels. 

A new article by Brumbaugh has recently appeared in the jottmtl of she I mnd Cavnatdd \nsmutts* Univrrsirv of 
London ( 1976). In this article. Brumbaugh up that his recent research has convinced him even more firmly of the cor- 
rectness of ha decipherment 


Chapter 6 

History of Other Substantial Analytic Efforts 

6.1 The Forms in Which the Manuscript Has Been Studied 

The Voynich manuscript was for a long time held in private hands, first by its discoverer, Wilfrid Voynich, rhcn bv his 
widow, and finally by H. P. Kraus. Because of its great financial value, its owners were understandably rductant to alio* 
unlimited access to it or reproduction of it;* although they 4rrqu end y cooperated with serious scholars seeking to unravel the 
mystery In the first few years after his discovery of the manuscript, Voynich made vigorous and repeated attempts to interest 
students in it. and Newbold was introduced to the problem through his efforts. It is possible that the disastrous outcome ot 
Newbold's researches, and the disappointment occasioned by their failure may have resulted in an atmosphere ot caution 
and of greater restriction on the pan of the owners in providing access to the manuscript in subsequent years 

As we have seen in the previous chapter, Feelv and Strong were able to study the text on lv through illustrations in tht 
published works of Newbold and others. The manuscript has come before the eyes of many other students, however, in the 
form of phocostatic copies. The copies used bv Friedman, Tiltman. Krischer. and Currier, and the copv available to me, all 
derive ultimately from a photocopy made by Father Petersen of Catholic University on April 29, 19}l. from a set oi 
photostats provided by Mrs. Voynich. Tiltman fin a report of Petersen's work made in conjunction with an inventor v of his 
papers after his death in 1966), states that ' virtually all copies of the manuscript in private hands are derived from Fr. 
Petersen's photostats/' The pages I have studied are, in fact, copies of copies at four or five removes. Friedman (in a note 
accompanying the copy m the Friedman collection) provides this interesting account of the photocopies in private ownership 
at char rime, and how they came into existence: 

On 2 1 Mav 1944 W| illiam J Ft . | Fjricdmin j wrote a lertcr ro the widow of Dr. Wilfrid M Vuvmch who was (he discoverer tit ihiv 
famous manuscript, requesting a phofosrenc copv The requeir was granted and a complete copv was made from a neifjtive phobriutii oipt 
provided bv Mrs Vormch. In her kner dated 31 May 1944, she stated tbit photostanc copies were exrremelv rare one is m the 
York Public Librarv, another is in the British Museum . another was given to Dr Petersen of Carbolic University, another was fivers to j 
scholar whom Mrs. Vormch did not idenufv: fmallv Mrs. Vormch hersell had a copv. With the copv tn the Friedman collecrmn there mi* 
appear to be in all si a copies in the world 

In general, (he photocopies I have seen provide a degree of definition and clarity' which is quire remarkable Details or 
penstrokes, guidelines on diagrams, and other fine details show up very well, and the text is dearly distinguishable almost 
everywhere. Certain deficiencies should, however, be mentioned, since they may have had a definite limiting or distorting 
effect, however slight, on the research carried out by many students. First, the complete lack of color in the black and white 
copies inevitably results in a loss of some meaningful information. This may be important not only in identifving plants and 
in understanding the meaning of other drawings, but even in isolating some details against a dark background. When 
everything is seen only in shades of grey, writing or small designs within colored fields are sometimes indistinguishable The 
same difficulty can anse in cases where the photocopy is very dark, so that the grev background obscures many details. 

A second defect of the photocopies available to me applies primarily to the large, multiply -folded folios. Because the copies 
had to be made in pieces, their over -a II relationship to form a whole is often very difficult to reconstruct: (he student does not 
see the complete system of drawings as they appeared in the original form. Worse vet. in some cases material has evidently 
been obscured by being out of focus around the edges of a page, or has been partly cut off, so that we do not see everything 
that was on some pages in the original. This is notably the case for the large, intricately folded folio 35-86. containing a 
complex system of inter -related circular diagrams. 

Another feature of the photostats 1 have studied, while not constituting as much of a hindrance to research as some of the 
problems already mentioned, is annoying and at times confusing to the student. There are numerous notes, circles, 
underlines, and other |omngs and scribbJmgs of modern researchers on many pages. Among these are copious and obtrusive 


I informed b\ Mr James GiUoglv. who has studied ihu copi. ihaT it is incomplete, comprising onlv abour ihe firsr third of thr manuscript 
made up primarily of plant folios. 


39 


remains of at least one previous computer processing project, including circled words and paragraphs, lines marking off pans 
of rhc reset, and legends such as start here . omit punch' . and punch just this." in some cases, these comments and marks 
cross the text and drawings in such a wav as to obscure or confuse some features of the original Generations of cryptanalysts 
have indulged their characteristic and apparently irresistible habit of underlining patterns and repetitions, and have otherwise 
triumphantly noted their guesses about the meaning of the diagrams I "the four ages of man/’ "the four seasons f. 
"Sagittarius — archer"), While one can empathize with the momentary joys and sorrows of one s predecessors as thev 
struggled with the enigma, most of these jottings are trivial at best, and at their worst serve onlv to further aggravate the 
difficult of the task I, for one, would prefer to see nothing more on the pages than what Wilfrid Vovmeh saw when he first 
viewed them in 1912, 

A final unavoidable disadvantage of working with copies is the inability of the student to venfv or reject hypotheses 
concerning the faint, parti all v-erased writing in other scripts and hands discussed in Section 4.2 above. Without a careful 
examination of the original, perhaps aided bv special chemical or photographic techniques to reveal the faint fragments of 
writing more fully, we cannot make the most of the opportunity they provide for a crack in the smooth shell of the mvsterv 
So little "crib" information is available; the scribe or scribes were so consistent in "enciphering or "encoding* everything, 
leaving no clues "in the dear", that we need every precious bit of added information we can glean from these extraneous or 
atypical scribbling*, whatever their source. 

Such, then are the photocopies with which mosr of the students have worked whose researches will be described in this 
chapter The first problem facing the analyst has been the attempt to arrive at a firm set of elementary svmbols comprising un 
alphabet" for the Voynich text. We have seen in Section 4,1 and figure 19 the wide differences between transcription 
alphabets adopted bv different students. Armed with a list of svmbols that satisfies him at least as a beginning, each student 
has then set about the task of making counts, indexes, concordances, and other anal vies, cither bv hand, or if he is so 
fortunate as to have access to computers, bv machine Some students have copied or transcribed large quantities of text bv 
hand; this is a good wav to get the "feel" of the text, and to become familiar with the svmbob and their variant forms. In the 
remainder of this chapter, several major analytic efforts will be reviewed. These studies, while not leading to a claim of a 
derisive break-in or decipherment. have in manv cases added substantial I v to our knowledge about the manuscript; thev are 
informative also from a methodological standpoint, and deserve the attention of anv serious student who prefers to learn 
from the work of his predecessors rather than blind Lv repeating it. 

6,2 First Voynich Manuscript Study Group, 1944-46 

Afrer the debunking and rejection bv scholars of the three major solutions claimed bv Newbold. Feek. and Sironc, 
William F . Friedman decided to mount a large-scale effort against the manuscript with the aid of a uniquely i if accidentally &gt; 
well -constituted team of researchers. This group, made up of scholars engaged in war work in Washineton. included 
i according to Elixebeth Friedman 1962) "specialists in philologv, paleography, ancient, classical, and medieval languages; 
Egyptologists, mathematicians, and authorities on other sciencesdepined in the manuscript." Awaiting demobilization at the 
dose of their service to the Government during World War 11, thev agreed to get together after working hours under 
Friedman s direction and focus char talents on the mvstenous manuscript. 

The group was called together by Friedman in Mav of 1944, On the rwenth-sixth of May. sixteen people attended the first 
meeting of what was termed an extracurricular undertaking. Friedman provided an outline of the manuscript s historv 
and previous solution attempts, and the attendees examined the photocopy lent to them bv Dr. Petersen. Sample sheets of 
copy were distributed to those present, and plans were made to work up a standard list of the svmbols and a transcription 
alphabet in Roman letters with some digits and special characters {punctuation, etc.) for processing on IBM punched -card 
accounting equipment. Figure 19 shows the list of svmbols and English equivalents thev arrived at. Meetings were held at 
approximately biweekly intervab through June; transcription of text and study of the script continued and various 
background topics (Athanasius Kircher s work. John Dee s activities, studies of medieval Latin, etc. &gt; were investigated and 
discussed. 

Meetings seem to have been somewhat less frequent and regular thereafter, or at least considerably less fully documented 
m the manures I have seen. Nevertheless, in September 1944 an "IBM run" had been made (on tabulating and sortmc 
machines, since no programmed computers were in general use at that time) In subsequent months, more text was 
transliterated and machined, in December 1944. meetings were resumed.” implying that a hiatus of some duration had 
elapsed during which the group had not been meeting. A new enthusiasm was communicated to the attendees, and a ne* 
impetus provided to their efforts (according to the minutes) bv William Friedman s presentation of his findings concerning a 


40 


synthetic language developed bv Wilkins’ Mee 6.6 and 9.3 below for further details. Studies ot this language indicated thai 
word beginnings and endings, lecrer frequencies, number of different symbol*, and word lengths seemed comparable eo those 
found in the Vovnich text. 

During January and February, the group continued co work on IBM runs and frequent v tabulations. There is. 
unfortunately, no record of their work after this time in the materials available to me. although there is evidence that work 
continued sporadically into 1945 and 1946. It is hard to telL in the absence of anv summary of their results, how much tc\ + t 
they succeeded in processing bv machine and what analyses thev performed on it. Judging bv the printouts ot machined text 
rhai were preserved in our records, thev transcribed and keypunched an impressive amount of text at least -iS.QOO 
characters, or 1663 thirty -character lines. The tabulations of results and anv report of rhe analvnc studies hu\e disappeared 
from the file, if thev ever existed in final form. Subsequent students have had to repeat, over and over aeain. all the work of 
transcription and machine preparation, as if it had never been done bv others. 

Eiiiebeth Friedman presents the following perspective on the outcome of the First Vovnich Manuscript Study Group 
"Because the preliminary work of transcribing the lext into, machine- processable symbols could onlv be done afrer work me 
hours, demobilization was practically complete before the manuscript was readv for final studv, The scientists thereupon 
disbanded and returned to their universities or research projects. Their considered opinion as eo the age. authorship and 
general nature of the manuscripts, based on their extracurricular work, are still valid todav i I962&gt;, 

63 Theodore C Petersen 

Father Petersen (1 883-19661 was a teacher and priest at St. Paul i College and Catholic University iThe toHomnc 
details are largely drawn from unpublished biographical notes and a survey of Petersen's work on the manuscript compiled 
by Tiitman afrer Petersen’s death in 1966.1 He had one hundred and twenty -two sheets of photosrats made on April 29, 
1931 from Mrs. Voynich's copy at a cost of $25.00 Thereafter he spent considerable time, especially from I 952 until the 
time of his death, in a painstaking and thorough study of the manuscript. His work included a complete hand copy. carefulh 
corrected by reference to the original, which he examined in the New York Guarantee Trust safe deposit vault where it was 
kept until Mrs. Voynich's death. A note on the front page of this transcript attests to the fan that he finished it Juh 19. 
1944. Tiitman 11975) reports that the task of copying the approximately 250,000 characters of text occupied about four 
rears. 

Petersen was a scholar of wide learning in ancient languages and history, and compiled a quantity of valuable and 
interesting information about religious, astrological, and mystical manuscripts and ocher sources of possible relevance io the 
Vovnich manuscript. He also directed considerable attention toward identifying the plants depicted in the herbal drawings 
The pages of his transcript are copiously annotated with these gleanings and commentaries In addition to the transcript. 
Petersen made (also by hand) a laborious and complete concordance of the entire manuscript, showing every word with 
reference to all the pages where it occurred and several words preceding and following each occurrence. As Tiitman suggests, 
in the absence of a complete computer index, this concordance can be of great value to students of the manuscript. 

in his scholarly and wide-ranging background research. Petersen studied the works of Ramon Lull and St. Hildegard or 
Bingen, magical manuscripts such as Picatrrx. astrological, alchemical, and herbal writings, and the works ot Albertus 
Magnus and Roger Bacon. There is. unfortunately, nowhere in the material available to me am report of theories Petersen 
may have held, or conclusions he mav have reached concerning the decipherment of the manuscript. At his death, his papers 
were given to William Friedman; they were inventoried at Friedman's request by Tiitman. and arc now a pan of the 
Friedman collection at the Marshall Library in Lexington. Virginia. 

6.4 Second Voynich Manuscript Study Group , 1962- 1963 

In 1962, Friedman succeeded in interesting computer specialists at the Radio Corporation of America in an experimental 
effort to studv the entire manuscript bv computer. The first meeting of a new study group was held on 25 December. 1962. 
According to the minutes. Mrs, Friedman presented background data on the history of previous work and general 
information on the manuscript. Mr. Friedman then gave a presentation on the 'Salient External Features and Cryptologic 
Characteristics oi the Manuscript/' The group worked together, again " extracurricular! v" and with a minimum of publicity, 
over the next several months. A small team of ‘ dedicated wives' 1 (as they were described by a participant in the study group/ 
were hard at work transcribing and keypunching a quantity of text, using facilities provided by RCA after working hours 


41 


Ambitious plans were laid for an impressive set of computer runs, intended to involve, according to the records I have 
studied, at least 2000 thirty-three character records, or upward of 66.000 characters of text. There are flowcharts, program 
specifications, and all the other paraphernalia of a full-scale computer attack, which (had it been completed) would certainlv 
have provided students with a powerful tool for research. The computer runs planned included studies of all character 
sequences fn -graphs") from one to six letters in length; single words and sequences of words in their context, the 
occurrence of letters at different positions within words; words in different positions within sentences: and, finally, a studv 
called "le tt e r permutations' whose nature is not dear to me from the documentation. This plan would have resulted in a 
complete computational- linguistic analysis of the Voynich text. 

I cannot determine how many characters of text were actually machined, and whether anv processing was ever completed. 
There is dear evidence in the records chat programs had been written to generate the computer files required to cam out the 
processing, and that detailed specifications had been set up for performing the sorts and tabulations. In September, 1963. 
plans were still being pursued to complete transcription and machining of text. Figure 1 9 shows the transcription alphabet 
used bv the RCA group to represent the Voynich script characters. Unfortunately, the second midy group suffered the same 
fate as the first: higher management at RCA decided to terminate even the minimal "extracurricular " involvement of their 
resources, and the group was forced to disband before any definitive results could be obtained. 

6,5 William F. Friedman 

A specialist m generics and biology who became one of the world s foremost cryptologists, Friedman was also a devoted 
student of the Voynich manuscript from the early twenues on. He worked with John M. Manly in resting and disproving 
New bold's claims. Elizebeth Friedman ( 1962) provides an amusing account of the sport she, her husband, and Manlv had 
together in demonstrating other J 'decipherments" that could be had from Newbold s text using his methods but with 
different arbitrary and subjective choices and arrangements of letters at certain stages of the process (see Section 5.1 above) 

In 1944, as we have seen earlier in this chapter, Friedman brought together the gathering of war -working scholars who 
formed the First Voynich Manuscript Study Group. Their work, unfortunately cut short before it could reach fruition, has 
ahead y been described, Elizebeth Friedman has this to say concerning her husband's enduring interest in the problem, which 
never flagged up to the time of his death in November, 1969: "Through the years since I92L Friedman has continued to 
interest scholars and cryptologic experts in the problem, besides giving it what spare time he could himself In the opinion of 
this writer. Friedman s studies have produced a theory which constitutes a logical basis for an attack that mav lead to a 
solution of this baffling manuscript" ( 1962). 

Friedman published a statement of his theory, in the form of an anagram, in a footnote to an article on another cryptologic 
topic in the January 1959 issue of the Philological Quarterly (Friedman and Friedman 1959), At the same time, he 
deposited a statement in dear English in the archives of the Quarterly's editor. He did this in order to establish and date his 
claim to the idea, which he could not yet work out in detail and prove sufficiently to publish. This is the anagram, as it 
appeared in the footnote: PUT NO TRUST IN ANAGRAMMATIC ACROSTIC CYPHERS. FOR THEY ARE OF 

LITTLE REAL VALUE — A WASTE— AND MAY PROVE NOTHING. — FINIS." (Friedman and Friedman 1959, p 
19). In his article* he sates that an anagram of this length is possible, though extremely difficult, to solve; in order to read it. 
one would have to know something of what it said. In this way, Friedman planned to have a cryptographer's last word, and 
thus triumph, even from the gra ve, over any later discoverer of the same idea. 

The theory which Friedman concealed in the anagram has since become known to a number of students, and there seems 
to be no further real secrecy concerning its nature. Tiltman had later independently reached the same conclusion (set Section 
6.6 below), namely that the text of the manuscript was written in a synthetic language built up on the basis of categories or 
classes of words with coded endings or other affixes, Friedman's and Tiltman s researches into known Languages of this cvpe 
have been mentioned above, and more will be said on the topic in 6.6 and in Chapter 9. 

* 6.6 John H, Tiltman 

Brigadier Tiltman. a professional cryptologin of long and distinguished experience, was introduced to the elegant puzzle 
of the Voynich manuscript in 1950 by William Friedman, who provided him with copies of several folios from the final 
section of the manuscript, consisting of text without drawings. Tiltman quickly carried out. by hand, a thorough set of 
statistical studies on the text, concentrating his efforts on the most frequent symbols and their combinations. His analysis, 
demonstrating a "precedence" structure of symbols within words and the orderly behavior of characters as 'beginners." 


42 


“middles/ and 'coders' of words, has remained one of (he most solid and useful findings gleaned bv students ot cht 
manuscript during many years of study. In 1951, Tiitman prepared an informal report in the form of a personal 
communication to his friend William Friedman, in which he summed up his work (Tiitman 1951k The next ft* 
paragraphs will briefly review some of the salient points in that report. 

Tiitman directed hii attention toward the behavior of the seventeen commonest symbols in the manuscript; figure 19 
shows his transcription alphabet. He notes the ordering of characters within words in such a way char they seem to reflect 
entities Like stems and affixes. Certain symbols most often begin words, and duster there with certain other symbols: others 
exhibit a preference for the ends of words, where they cluster in certain arrangements with other symbols. There is j 
structure of repeated "V and “C" symbols after and “0". and before ^ if*’, A table of these bl- 

endings \ as found by Tiitman, is shown in figure 27. He mentions also the frequent sequential repetition of ^ “ in 
phrases such as 1 ft? *? "■ ”5? •?«£ . etc., repeating the suggestion of a friend of his that these and other similar short 

repeated groups might stand for Roman numerals. (for example, "*t^) " might be "iij", and J might be xxv 1 . 

While mentioning this idea as an interesting possibility, Tiitman points out thir it does not work out well in some cases, and 
it nil! leaves us with too many unsolved problems. In any case, the ordering of symbols within words dearly demonstrated bv 
Tiitman. and since confirmed by others, presents us with a phenomenon which must be satisfactorily explained bv anv valid 
decipherment theory. 

As he stated in his 1951 report to Friedman. Tiitman had independently arrived at the same theory about the plaintext 
underlying the Voynich script that Friedman himself had earlier developed. He states this theory thus: As vou know, I ear In- 
formed the opinion, which you held much earlier than [.that there was no cipher involved ar all (in the common h- accepred 
sense of the word) and rhat the bans was more likely to be a very primitive form of synthetic universal language such as was 
developed in the form of a philosophical classification of ideas by Bishop Wilkins in 1667“ (1951. p. 1). Tiitman became 
convinced, from his study of the behavior of symbols within words and words within lines of text, that the phenomena could 
not be explained by any simple substitution system. In pursuit of confirmation for his theory, he undertook a determined 
search to trace back the concept of ’ universal 1 ' and “synthetic" languages to a time that might be consistent with the origin 
of the Vovnich manuscript (1550 or earlier). 

Fnedman. as we have seen above, had turned up two interesting synthetic language systems: one developed bv Bishop 
John Wilkins (1641, 1668a. 1668b). and another of somewhat later date devised bv George Dalgarno (166L I 68 O 1 
Tiitman studied these two languages carefully, looking for stvhsac and statistical similarities to the Voynich text. While both 
systems were probably of too late a date to have been used by the author of the manuscript, they might have arisen in, or 
been based upon, an earlier system that could have been so employed. Tiitman concluded that both Wilkins and Dalgarno s 
languages were much too systematic to account for the phenomena in the Voynich text. He postulated, instead, a language 
that employed a “highly illogical mixture of different kinds of substitution'* { 195 1, p. 2 ). 

Looking back further in history for a still earlier form of 'universal language ”, Tiitman discovered a system called the 
"Universal Character", devised by one Cave Beck (Beck 1657). This system looked somewhat promising, though ir was still 
hardly early enough in date; it was certainly ’illogical" and “mixed " in us methods. The words of a small English dictionary 
were assigned numbers from one to 3999, in rough alphabetical order, creating a crude four -digit code as a foundation for 
the language. A subset of about one hundred and seventy -five common words could also be represented by three- letter 
groups in addition to the basic four -digit code groups, constituting, in effect, a set of variants for these words; these special 
trigraphs all began with Y or ' Y\ 

Code groups representing nouns in Beck s syitem were preceded by the letter V\ and adjectival groups bv the letter q“ 
Synonyms (e.g T1 “to think" and "to cogitate") had the same four -digit group assigned to them. Plurals were shown bv an 
' Y . or sometimes, an “ 8 ". after the digit -group. Verbs might have up to three letters prefixed to their four-digit group for 
certain forms. The digit -groups themselves could be written also in letters, each digit being represented by a sv liable 
&lt; consonant- vowel, vowel -consonant, or consonant- vowel- consonant). This variation, intended bv Beck to produce 
pronounceable forms for the code words, constitutes from a cryptographic point of view a substitution of digraphs or 
mgraphs for the digits, to provide a set of variants. Finally, because of the arbitrarily mixed letter -number makeup of words, 
a separator was required to show where one word ended and the next began. Tiitman points out that the common "ending 
group »r in the Voynich text could stand for a plural "s " followed bv a word separator as in Beck s language. 

Tiitman discovered another, sbJ] older “synthetic language" proposal by a man named Johnston, developed under the 
direction of a Bishop Bedell about 1641. No detailed description of this system has survived, unfortunately In Chapter 9. 
more will be said about synthetic and universal languages in general. I will also present, in Section 6.10 below, mv own 


43 


I 


findings in tracing the evidence for the existence of similar synthetic languages or codes back considerably earlier— perhaps 
well into the fifteenth or ar least mto the eariv sixteenth ccnturv. 

In later reports ( 1967. 1968. 19751. Ttkman describes his other principal line of research on the Voynich manuscript. He 
spent some time in England in 1957 consulting experts on early herbals and medical manuscripts, and attempting to track 
down in origin for the plant illustrations. He presents an excellent overview of the history of early her bah and botanical 
illustrations f 1 967. 1968). Summing up his own end others failure to discover any dear parallels to the Vovnich 
manuscript, he lays. To the best of my knowledge no one has been able to find anv point of connection with anv other 
medical manuscript or early printed book. This is all the stranger because the range of writing and illustration on the subject 
of the plant world from the early Middle Ages right through into the sixteenth and even seventeenth centuries was veri 
limited indeed. ... In general, the illustrations in the early printed herbah are limited to two or three collections of su lked 
woodcuts copies over and over again in more and more degenerate form" ( 1 968. p. 11). 

Aside from the substantive contributions Tiitmans research has made to our knowledge of the manuscript, another 
important result of his work should be mentioned. Over the many years of his association with the problem, he has served as 
a coordinator and contact point for students interested in the manuscript and desiring information about the text or about 
studies carried our on it by others. His papers and presentations have provided many researchers with a full introduction to 
the subject, and have motivated a number of students to take up an interest in the manuscript. It should be evident to am 
reader who has persevered this far in reading this lengthy monograph that the puzzle of the Vovnich manuscript presents a 
complex challenge, and can best be approached by cooperative research, building on the earlier findings of others as in am 
orderly scientific enterprise. Tikman’s publications and communications have provided such a foundation on the basis of 
which newer scudenu can advance, without being forced to exhaust their resources needlessly repeating all the work that 
others have already accomplished. 

6.7 Jeffrey Krischer 

Knscher. a man of very broad interests and talents comprising mathematics, computer science, medicine, and crvptologv . 
became interested in the manuscript and made a computer analysis of the text as a research project during his graduate studv 
at Harvard University This research was described in a paper which received a limited circulation at Harvard and am one 
students of the manuscript ( Krischer 1969V In Pan 1 of his paper, Knscher provides a brief sketch of the earlier solution 
claims by New bold. Feelv, and Strong, and reviews some general information about the history and background of the 
manuscript. In Pan II. "Statistical Analysis." he presents an interesting discussion of the problems involved m arriving at a 
transcription alphabet and a description of the alphabets used by Newbold. Currier, and Tikman. He suggests and describes 
several srvlostaristical techniques which might usefully be applied to the Vovnich text. 

Krischer 's approach eo the computer study of the manuscript is uniquel v interesting because he employed a special package 
of programs developed for machine processing of Chinese characters on the Digital Equipment Corporation PDF-1 
computer. As Krischer states, this set of programs was general enough to permit its application to the Vovnich script symbols 
The symbols (following Curriers alphabet) were drawn on a cathode ray tube "scope" display attached to the PDP-1 
computer. The text "could then be transcribed by pointing with a light pen to the corresponding character on the scope for 
each character of the script" (Krischer 1969, p. 4). This method of transcription was more direct and convenient than the 
laborious hand copying and keypunching required by other computer studies. The PDF- 1 system also permitted convenient 
editing and correction of the transcribed text from the scope. The output of computer runs could be processed on the 
Strom berg -Carlson 4020 equipmcnr to produce a graphic reproduction of the Vovnich characters, thus avoiding entirely the 
cumbersome and distorting artificial Romamzationa that all ocher students have had to resort to. The Vovmch text could be 
fed direcrlv into the computer, where it could be subjected ro any desired manipulation or statistical analysis. Approximately 
two percent, or 5500 out of the 250.000 characters in the manuscript, were machined by Knscher in this wav. according to 
his own statement ip. 53). His frequency counts are shown in figure 28: it mav be noted that they add up to about 6200, a 
discrepancy for which I can find no explanation. 

In Section III of his monograph. Krischer discusses some statistical tools for comparing different samples of natural 
language text. He selects three such techniques as potential Jv useful in comparing the Voynich ten to samples in known 
languages. These statistical tools are: 1 ) a statistic or "characteristic" * V, describing the degree of compactness or economy 
in the sequences of characters m the text; 2) a statistic representing the "entropy" or degree of "orderedneu" in a body of 
text, having a characteristic value for each natural language; and 31 Markovian analysis, a wav of studying the probability 
that anv particular letter will be a successor to anv other particular letter in a string of text. Knscher suggests that these 
measures, which have proven effective in other srvlostatistical researches, mav be useful in helping us to determine the 


44 


underlvinc lanpuaje of the Voynich text. (In this approach, he assumes first, that the method ot Concealment or 
encipherment has not obscured anv of the charanenstics of natural lancuajte plaintext, and. second, that j recocniajbic 
natural language does, in fact, underiv the text. As we have seen in Section 4.4 above, neither ot these assumptions can be 
taken for granted, and in fan. thev are both counter -indicated bv much of the evidence, as noted bv Tiltman. Eiuebeth 
Friedman, and others. I 

The "k ' statistic and the 'entropv measure were computed bv Knscher for characters and for words ol the V ovmch text 
sample he machined He states, however, that these are of no use without parallel measures for Latin or other natural 
language text for comparison. He also considers his own text sample much too small for the useful application ot the 
' Markovian Analysis " method, which would, he states, require at least five times as much text, or 25.000 characters. At the 
time of writing his paper. Krischer planned to carry out further studies; l cannot find anv record of am subsequent results 
however This promising and interesting computer project, which pointed out a wav ol testing some important hypotheses 
about the ten. seems to have been terminated, like so roanv of the others, before it came close to achieving am useful results 

6.8 Prescott Carrier 

Captain Currier* a prominent professional eryptologist and close associate of Friedman and Tiliman* participated in their 
researches and became an enthusiastic student of the puzzle, Tiltman f 1 97 Si sums up Curriers recent work on the 
manusc ipi as follows: “Since his retirement - . seven years ago Captain Currier has spent a great deal ot time ptrtormim: hi* 
own an J vies of the manuscript He holds the view that there are at least mo different handwritings which he calls A and B 
In everv case the two sides of a leaf recto and verso are m one and the same hand . Further his analysis shows that chert 
are significant differences in their content* as in the frequency of symbols associated with one another in words When I 
came to prepare this lecture. ] saw at once one difference between the content of the A and B pages which convinced me In 
his account of suffixes following a number of the common roots the suffix 8G lorgj ^ 1 occurs eight times tn rwemv-tive A 
pages and 334 times in twenty- five B pages. ,,.Mv own feeling is that the two ’languages" express different applications 
bv two scribes of the same rather loose set of rules to similar texf \ 

Currier was able* in 1973* to have computer studies made comparing two careful l v-chosen matched samples of text* one in 
hand A and the other in hand B* both selected from the herbal folios. The results of the snidv clear! v demonstrated 
significant differences between the samples. In the course of subsequent hand studies* Currier has arrived at a number or 
further conclusions regarding the contrast between material in hands A and B. and he is still pursuing this productive line &lt;&gt;i 
investigation He has extended his studies to other sections of the manuscript in addition to the herbal folios His work is 
documented in four unpublished papers (Currier 1970-1976* D'Impcno 1976k 

6*9 Some Comments Regarding Computer Methods 

The subject of computers as tools in huma rustic research* and specifically m the attack on the Vovmch manuscript, is one 
rhat holds a special interest for me since 1 am a computer programmer bv profession and mv academic background is in 
classical philology There are several wavs the computer can aid in the studv of the Vovmch manuscript* as in other* similar- 
text 'processing undertakings. These arc; 1 ) a data processing function, permitting the marupuJation and organization of text 
in larger and more significant sample sizes than can be dealt with bv hand* 2) an exploratory data reduction function. 
allowing us ro apply various indexes* counts* and ocher selection* display, summarizing and tabulation techniques, in order to 
explore the data and show up any patterns or regularities it may contain as an aid to hypothesis searching; and 3) a 
hypothesis -tasting function, for investigating various specific theories we mav have developed as a result of hunthes^ or 
from exploratory hand and machine studies. 

Most of the use of computers bv students of the manuscript falls in the first (data processing! and second (exploratory data 
reduction) categories While these are both useful and neceisarv in their place* the third use of computers, in systematic 
hypothesis -testing, seems in mv opinion to be the most powerful and the most Iikelv to produce solid and meaningful 
contributions to our knowledge of the problem. A significant example of this effective use of computers is Prescott Currier s 
recent study of hands A and B* discussed in the previous section. Gurnet had developed his idea about hands bv visual 
inspection of the manuscript before he came to the computer specialists to seek their aid* He had a definite hypothesis, which 
l will presume to paraphrase as follows: “If* m fact* there is a real and significant difference between the text in the two sets 
of pages that look different to me. then thev will have different distributions and clusterings of charaaers." Accordingly, he 
requested onlv certain carefully- planned machine runs, to be made only on rwo matched samples of text chosen so as to keep 
other variables constant in so far as was possible. The computer runs riearlv confirmed his theory, demonstrating the 


45 


differences he had postulated between the two samples: a result that might never have been obtained through anv amount of 
machine processing applied indiscriminately to masses of unselected text. 

In mv opinion, this is the best wav the computer can serve us at this stage in our research on the manuscript. All the more 
obvious and easier data processing and data reduction displays have been made again and again by various students, with 
disappointing results. It seems evident that, if anything new is to be learned from computer runs, we must perform some 
more carefully -planned selection of the data, or some more specific and sophisticated manipulations such as would show up 
concealed patterns in the internal structure of words and sentences, in response to a particular theory regarding the 
crvptologic nature of the text, or some theory about its possible content or provenience. It is all too easy to plug a wav at 
machining more and more data in very general ways, with no guiding principle for selection and interpretation Our abilities 
to process data bv machine today frequently far outrun our planning and imaginative capabilities. We are likelv to end up too 
often with manv feet of printouts that tell us little or nothing, since we still have no meaningful questions to ask. One of the 
most demanding aspects of scientific work is the framing of useful questions, and the design of experiments that will produce 
useful answers. We need to apply this scientific approach to our study of the manuscript, and especially in our use of 
computers. In hand studies, the limitations of patience and a me on the part of the investigator effectively preclude manv of 
the more wasteful activities, or at least prevent their assuming wasteful proportions, but the computer permits us to transcend 
these limitations and. alas, to carry out wasteful activities on a grand scale. 


46 


Chapter 7 

Collateral Research: Roger Bacon (A.D. 1214?- 1292?) 

The necessarily brief and sketchy review in this chapter cannot approach an appropriate treatment of the remarkable 
thirteenth -century scholar whose name his so frequently been associated with the Vovnich manuscript. As mai be seen trom 
the discussion of Bacon s possible authorship of the manuscript in Section 2.2,2 above, there is no solid evidence eirher 
supporting or denying his connection with the work, however indirect. Nevertheless, anvone interested in rhe manuscript, 
find, indeed, anvone who cares about the history of Western thought) should learn as much as possible about Friar Bacon, it 
only because he was so evidently a man worthy of closer acquaintance. He is especially appealing to the modern reader lor 
would be, if his works were made more accessible) in chat he has told us. in a forthright and ingenuous manner, so much 
about himself in his own writings; in fact, almost all that is known about him today originates in his own words, since his 
contemporaries rarely, if ever, mentioned him in surviving records. Bacon’s own voluminous writings, and the manv and 
varied specialized studies of his life and work made bv scholars of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, afford a weairh of 
insight i.ito those problematical relationships between wisdom and science, God and Narure, human value and objective 
technology, which still confront us today, however we may attempt to disguise them by recasting chem into modern larcon 

7.1 Works By and About Roger Bacon 

Bacon $ life and works have been described and analyzed in a number of mayor studies, though I believe ir is still fair ro 
say that, up to the present, no truly complete and definitive treatment has been attempted. Few of his writings have been 
translated into any modem language; much remains unedited and unpublished even in the original Latin. Bacon himself 
exacerbated the problem by reworking and re-using his writings over and over again, so that it is hard to tell which of the 
many fragmentary works that survive are copies or revisions of parts of other works, and which are separate compositions 
The condemnation of his doctrines bv the Franciscan Order, and the resulting suspicion and fear on the part of later w riters, 
contributed to the confusion, since many scholars quoted or copied his works without daring to mennon his name As a 
consequence of these many obscurities and difficulties. Bacon’s works are not all accessible to the modern reader, with the 
sole exception of a translation into English of the Opus Majus (Bacon 1928b). 

Scholarly studies of Bacon's writings have been carried out primarily from verv specialized and narrow points of view At 
one extreme, historians of science have been interested in Bacon as a part of their search for precursors of modern objective 
experimental methods: at the other extreme. Catholic philosophers and scholars have examined his pronouncements on 
various technical points concerning medieval Scholastic philosophy. Emile Charles (18611, despite the early date of his work, 
provides a remarkably clear, fair, but sympathetic general presentation, expressed in elegant scholarly French and bolstered 
bv a quahtv of learning formidable in its thoroughness and dedication. A careful reading of this enjovable. humane book is 
recommended as a starting point for anyone interested in Bacon. Later writers are indebted to Charles for much of the 
information presented in their volumes and for much of its interpretation as well. A much more recent book by Stewart C 
Easton (1952) is also to be recommended unreservedly; his approach is remarkable in its imaginative use of historical 
analysis and its creative extrapolation from the few available facts to develop a striking picture of Baton * personality and a 
clear perspective cm his thought. James Blish (the well-known Science Fiction writer prominent in connection with the Star 
Trek series) has written a very fine fictional biography (1971), based primarily on Easton's study of Bacon, which I also 
recommend to the interested reader, 

I have attempted to obtain and read every serious work concerning Roger Bacon which I could find, in an effort to gain a 
fuller understanding of his contribution to knowledge and his possible association with the Voynich manuscript. The 
bibliography appended to this monograph, (while it cannot claim to be exhaustive, and does not even include all the works I 
have examined, since some appear likely to be of Little value to the reader primarily interested in the Vovnich manuscript!, 
should provide access to most of the major works on Bacon in English as well as many in other Western European languages. 


47 


7.2 Bacon f J Life and Works 

Bacon spent most, it nor all. of his adult life as a scholar or teacher. He studied and then* having completed a Master of 
Am Decree, taught at the Universities of Oxford and Paris in the 1230 s and 1240 s. The newly rediscovered works on 
natural philosophy by Aristotle occupied a central focus of intellectual excitement at the time. Aristotle s works had been 
preserved among Mohammedans along with other sources of Greek learning* while they were forgotten bv a Europe 
immersed in rhe barbarism of the Dark Ages and the obscurantism of the early Church: translated into Latin and 
accompanied bv a wealth of commentary bv Mohammedan and Jewish philosophers* these new weilsprmgs of earlv Greek 
science brought about an intellectual revolution in thirteenth -century Europe. The task of attempting to resolve the basic 
differences between the philosophy of Aristotle and his pagan commentators, on the one hand, and the ami -intellectual, 
other-worldly viewpoint of the Church Fathers forming an integral pan of Christian doctrine, on the other hand 
preoccupied the attention and strained the resources of thi net nth -century thinkers. 

Bacon was one of the first scholars capable of lecturing on the newly, revealed Aristotelian Natural Philosophv and Arab 
commentaries. He was evidently a good teacher, and must have enjoyed his years at the Universities. A voluminous 
manuscript, apparently representing a student s long-term collection of notes or transcripts of Baton s lectures on various 
works of Aristotle, covering several years, has been edited by Steele {Bacon 1909-1940). Another manuscript, also 
described bv Steele (1933). represents notes bv a student in other, much more elementary courses on geometrv. arithmetic, 
and similar topic v given bv Bacon. 

At some point in his University studies. Bacon suddenly seems to have changed the course of his thinking, turmne aw j\ 
from the promising and rather successful career he had been making for himself as a teacher, he apparent! v took off on *i 
course of self-study, seeking out obscure scholars interested in the 'natural science” of the day akhemv. astronomy, and 
astrology He became particularly preoccupied with " expert memurn”: an approach to nature that involved the collection and 
systematic comparison and analysis of other s reports on natural phenomena* along with a son of informal tinkering or trial - 
and -error investigation of phenomena in order to understand them better. The ”sdentia experimental is' of Roger Bacon was 
not at all like our modern, controlled laboratory experimentation, with its vast armament of equipment* procedures, and 
models: nevertheless* is had the same fundamental orientation toward the external, objective world, and the same motivation 
in open-minded curiosity. Bacon also began so place great emphasis on knowledge of languages other chan Latin, m 
particular Greek. Hebrew, Arabic, and other original languages of the Bible and the Greek and Arab philosophers, regarded 
bv Bacon as the sources of wisdom revealed bv God. 

Bacon wrote extensively on a variety of topics, notably on optics and the transmission of light: geography: astronomy and 
astrology; language, translation, and Biblical criticism; the reform of the calendar and of education: medicine: and akhemv. 
A prominent feature of his works was an emphasis on the utility of these arts and sciences for the salvation of man &lt;md the 
good of the Church. He was. first and foremost, a "mission oriented' thinker, and constantly reiterated the meaninglessness 
of any knowledge without a moral goal and frame of reference. For him. rhe motivation of science and learning was to be 
found in the mission of the Church. He asserted the methodological unity of science, philosophv. and religion, and was 
interested, to a degree unusual for his time, in methodology as such. It is interesting to note, also, that Bacon spoke as often 
and as insistently of the "beauty " of philosophv and science as of their utility f for example, in an appealing and characteristic 
phrase quoted bv Frankowska ( 1971. p. 36), from Bacon s CommunU Naruruha . he says he wishes to compose a treatise on 
Perspective quia hcc est pukhrior alii*. . . because it is more beautiful" than other sciences) 

Some rime in the 1 240's Bacon decided to join the Franciscan Order, for reasons he never discusses in hts works. Manv 
scientifically-oriented modern writers have speculated about this course of action, which appears to many of us. from our 
distant land often irreligious) viewpoint, to have been a fatal mistake on his part. He never seems to have gotten along ven 
well with his superiors, and incurred some degree of discipline or confinement on at least two occasions (on the nature and 
severity of these punishments, sec Fcrei 18911. In 1267. he was asked bv Pope Clement IV to send copies of his 
philosophical writings to Rome, and in response, produced the Opus Maps. Opus Minus, and Opus Trrttum \ his three besc- 
known works). Clement s death in 1268 destroyed anv hopes Bacon might have had of achieving recognition and support for 
his educational and intellectual reforms, although he apparently made several subsequent attempts to write a Stnptum 
PnrtcjpaU. or encyclopedic work on human knowledge, that was probably never completed. Again imprisoned or severely 
restricted bv his Order in 1278. he produced little further until his death in 1292 lor* some claim* 1294). Lists of Bacon % 
extant writings and fuller treatments of his biography mav be found in Charles ( 1861 ). Easton { 1932 1, and Little i I 892, 
1914). 


48 


7.3 Survival and Significance of Bacon's Work in Later Times 


The thirteenth -century Friar Roger, a: has been noted bv jevera! writers, has been overshadowed and submerged in the 
far ^rearer acclaim accorded bv our age to his namesake, Francis Bacon, who is credited with the invention o t mender n 
scientific method. Roger Bacon seems to have been regarded by manv recent writers as a sort of exasperating enigma; he 
stubbornly refuses to be stuffed into any of their favorite pigeonholes. Scientific writers are impatient with his expert mental 
science" because he did not provide diagrams and specifications of his constructions and laboratory equipment as a present - 
day scientist would be expected to do. Students of Scholastic philosophy find him an indifferent philosopher, and his name i * 
omitted entirely from a number of modern survevs; in others he is passed over with a few ambiguous sentences Sharr 
\ 1930) provides a dear and not overiv favorable examination of Bacon's positions on various typical Scholastic questions, m 
comparison with a number of his other, more conventional, contemporaries, Manv writers seem unable to decide whether 
Bacon was a religious mystic on the one hand, or an iconoclastic positivist and empiricist on the other. 

Roger Bacon' s main difficulty was undoubtedly his inability to be a "team plaver he did not allv himself wtrh anv 
school of thought accepted in his time, and in fact launched violent and outspoken attacks upon most of his better -known 
contemporaries. He frequently referred to them as a "stupid crowd/' and castigated them for their "stuiticiam infinitum , 
this uncompromising combativeness was probably the real cause of his condemnation, however it mav have been 
rationalized. He was apparently trying to articulate ideas for which his own age had no words, nu predilection, and n&lt;« 
understanding; our age has dearly swung so far to the opposite, positivistic pole that we have even less real sympathy aru; 
comprehension for the synthesis he was trving to form. Bacon went his own wav. building his own amalgam of faith, mai ik 
philology, and natural philosophy based on Greek, Arabic, and Jewish writings and borrowing from a very small number 01 
living colleagues (Robert Grosseteste. Adam dc Marisco, Peter de Maricounh He rejected the Scholastic Method developed 
by Peter Abaelard. in favor of his "scienda experimemaitsT and he minimized the importance ot logic and verbal 
disputation, so dearly loved by his contemporaries. On the other hand. Bacon's "experimentum ' included the study ot 
reported "experiences" of the Greek and Arab philosophers, comprising fables and superstitions concerning such things as 
the virtues of viper's flesh, the influences of the stars, and flying dragons; stranger still to the modern mind, his 
"experimentum" included Divine illumination and mystical insight from God. Thus, Bacon succeeded at the same time m 
alienating all of his colleagues in his own time, and m confounding all of his would-be admirers in our centurv as well. 

Condemned by his Order and prevented from writing or teaching. Roger Bacon was marked out tor oblivion bv his 
superiors and fellow scholars. His voluminous works were apparently ignored, but exploited indirectly and in hidden wavs b; 
his immediate successors who feared to mentioned him bv name His name was apparently even erased from some copies of 
his works Bv the end of the fourteenth centurv, however. Bacon began to enjov a gradual revival or emergence of sorts. H \\ 
work on medicine (Bacon 1928a) was transparently pirated and plagiarized to good effect bv some later medical writers 
This, together with his Eptstoia de Mirahili Potestatt Artis et Naturae (Bacon 1859 », and several garbled and spurious 
alchemical works (Bacon 1603; Singer 1932) were quite popular, and served to provide the Franciscan Friar with 4 
formidable reputation for vast occult powers, John Dee was a devoted disciple of Roger Bacon, and did much to bring about 
a new Renaissance of his reputation and writings. It has been suggested that Francis Bacon was introduced to Roger s works 
at Mortiake. Dee s home, through the extensive library of Bacon s writings Dee had lovingly and assiduously collected Sony 
have even gone so far as to suggest that Francis was far more indebted to "a certain monk in a cell" than he ever admitted. 

From the late 1800 s on into the early twentieth century. Bacon had another revival, being hailed as a martyred 
forerunner of modern experimental science and technology. Much was made of his predilection for "experimentum . and hi* 
emphatic rejection of the ideas and methods of his contemporaries. Newbold's claim to have deciphered the Voinich 
manuscript, and to have discovered evidence there of Bacon s invention of the telescope and microscope, came at the crest of 
this wave and added briefly to its momentum. Catholic writers hailed the Newbold theory as a "vindication of thirteenth 
centurv science " (ReviHe 192 L Walsh 1921 ). Rudvard Kipling wrote an interesting short storv called The Eve of Allah 
m which Roger Bacon was a central figure (Kipling 1926; I am indebted to Brigadier Tiltman for pointing out this storv tu 
me). Typical of the effusions of some considerably less gifted writers is an article bv Grove Wilson in a popular survey called 
Great Men of Science i 1942); overflowing with pathos for the persecutions visited upon Bacon s "scientific” genius bv tht 
witch-hunting Church, this embarrassingly dreadful dose of purple prose even credits Bacon with the invention of the steam 
engine in his "laboratory," 

Predictably enough, the pendulum swung rapidly to the other extreme, aided considerably bv the debunking of New bold s 
theory bv Manly and Friedman Lvtm Thorndike (1916. 1921. 1929, 1923-58) went further than most in attempting to 
divest Roger Bacon of any claim to respect as a philosopher or a scientist. In Thorndike s monumental work. The History of 


49 


Vltfjpfi’ and Experimental Science *1923-58'. he dismisses Bacon as a superstitious medieval monk, a believer in map C, 
completely devoid of inv trace of the modern scientific outlook, and thus not worth v of the attention ot modern thinkers 
While he deals almost as harshh with all the medieval writers he discusses in his work. Thorndike s debunking of Baton 
seems to be a shade more savage and thoroughgoing. undoubted Iv in an over -reaction to the effusive and misplaced adulation 
of Bacon by some earlier writers 

Steele ( 19211 provides what seems to me to be a verv fair estimate of Bacon's place in history; he is supremely well 
qualified to assess Bacon s works, having edited more of them than most other Baconian scholars. He offers the following 
perspective, based on Bacon's stated plans for his unfinished Scrrptum FrinapmU "In estimating Bacon s position among the 
men of his own time it is important to remember, first of all. the complete originality of his scheme. His great work, 
unfinished though it most probabh was . . , was as distinct in kind as in form from the works of his great 
contemporaries Bacon s schematic arrangement was nor onh unparalleled among the writers of his time: it was 

absolutely new Nothing like it had been devised since the time of Aristotle. . The whole svseem of human thought was 
recast, ... It mav be that the framework of his scheme owed something to Al Farabi s Dt 5c/&gt;iacii&gt;. or to Avicenna, but in its 
conception and execution its originality is manifest" Ipp. t4 1-142). 

A very interesting recent study bv a Polish author, Malgorzata Frankowska 119711. presents a verv favorable, vet fullv 
documented and supported assessment of Roger Bacon s contributions to knowledge and his influence on the development of 
modern thought. She provides several detailed examples of Bacon s approach to empirical science; his treatment of the cause 
of rainbows in ti e Opus Map* j, for example, clearly supports a conclusion that he fullv shared manv of the systematic and 
analytic mental habits of the modern scientist (Frankowska 1971, pp. 85-87; cf Bacon 1928b. pp. 5S 7 _ 615). Though the 
equipment, the data* and the sources at his command were woefully deficient, he used the reports of others and his own 
carefully -planned observations in a doselv -reasoned, orderly manner to eliminate various competing hypotheses and io build 
up confirmatory evidence for one particular explanation of the observed and reported rainbow phenomena. 

It is interesting to note that, in spite of his later explicit rejection of the Scholastic Method. Bacon made extensive and 
e x pe n use of it in his earlier lectures f 'Quaesoones ') on Aristotle, and he was evidently a skilled master of this highly- 
developed form of analytic disputation (see Steele 1933). At the heart of the Scholastic Method was an arrangement of data 
(constating* typically* of quotations from Biblical and Patristic authorities and from Greek and Arab philosophers) so that all 
those sources favoring and those opposing a given point at issue were matched in an orderly wav, followed bv a ' solution' or 
' resolution' attempting to reach a conclusion from all the evidence. This method, when ikil fully applied to valid data, was 
and sail is a powerful tool of analysis, and differed essentially from modern scientific thought onlv in its raw materials 
[quotations from "authorities ' rather than empirical measurements ) and its purpose (the resolution of religious and verbal 
rather than technical and empirical questions In his analysis of the rainbow. Bacon put to good use the best features of the 
Scholastic Method as applied to the strongest and best data he could obtain 

Roger Bacon s principal contribution to knowledge, according to Frankowska. involved the nature and methodology of 
science. Rejecting the presentations of ocher writers* which she regards as onesided (even m the case of Easton, whose view 
of Bacon she sees as overemphasizing the religious and mystical side of his nature)* she assesses Bacon s accomplishments in 
the following considered tribute: "Bacon was the first to consider in such a large w*y the theoretical problems connected 
with science, he was also the first who had the vision of the uturv of science* based on the units of method and 
purpose Moreover, he was the first to originate theoretical reflections concerning the nature of science and its 
aims— reflections which were to find mature expression much later* m the time of Frauds Bacon and Descartes, . . (p 
134). She concludes chat "The thought of Roger Bacon lies at the source of both the empiricism of Francis Bacon and the 
mathematical method of Descartes (p. 136)* and recommends* as have other scholars before her. a systematic historical 
study to demonstrate and prove the influence of Roger Bacon s writings on the better -known later thinkers. 

Until his works have been edited, translated, and systematical I v studied as a whole, on their own terms and against the 
background of his known sources and contemporary thought* no definitive evaluation of Bacon s contribution to human 
knowledge is possible. He remains, for most moderns as for his own contemporaries, an enigmatic and recalcitrant figure 
who determinedly refuses to be filed away in any convenient cubby -hole. 

7 A Was Roger Bacon Associated With the Voynich Manuscript ? 

Coming now to the question of Bacon s possible authorship of, or connection with, the Voynich manuscript, what* if 
anything, can we concluded I feel, although ! cannot support mv view with anv definite evidence* thai his authorship is 
highly unlikely, nor only because of the great disparity of dates between Bacon's life in the thirteenth century and -the 
probable origin of the manuscript tn the fifteenth or sixteenth century. J base my opinion also on the impression I have 


50 


gained from a careful study of what is known about his life and his writings, including an attempt i necessarily rapid and 
inadequate) to sample his own published works m the original Latin. I feel, in sum. chat Bacon was nor a man who would 
have produced a work such as the Vovnich manuscript, even during his periods of imprisonment or persecution. 

Far from being a rebel or iconoclast in any modern sense. Bacon was clearly a deeply, even passionately religious man who 
accepted the beliefs of his Church. He chose to become a member of the Franciscan Order, and chose to remain within it for 
the rest of his life, in spite of repeated harassment* and disappointments. He claimed repeatedly that the onlv purpose of 
human knowledge was to serve God. uphold the Catholic Faith, convert unbelievers, and defeat the evil power land 
technology!) of Antichrist. He was also fascinated, as we have seen, bv mathematics, methodology, and inductive reason, 
however inadequate the data and techniques available to him may have been 

Bacon, in short, docs not seem to me to be the sort of man to have created a magical manuscript, so provincial in srvle. m&gt; 
ambiguous and curious as the puzzle before us. Almost al) of his authenne writings that have come down to us are clear, 
scholarly treatises in medieval Latin, quite uncompromising in their forthright and rational quality He was skilled m 
draftsmanship, and trained assistants in' the computation anddrawing up of tables and diagrams. In none of his extant works 
is there any indication of a real personal interest in biology or botany, although he praised, in passing, the usefulness of 
agriculture and husbandry. His medical work was a faithful and complete compilation of information about medicinal plants 
drawn from other authorities, and not original with him. His approach to astronomy, astrology, and alchemy was abstract 
and conventional, oriented toward methodology and terminology; it provides no frame of reference within which we mi eh: 
understand the Voynich manuscript s idiosyncratic Zodiac diagrams and other drawings decorated with female figures and 
symbolic pipes, “cans.' and tubs. 

It seems to me much more likely that the Voynich manuscript is a product of the sixteenth century, probablv related to 
alchemy, and perhaps, as suggested bv Brumbaugh, ascribed to Bacon because of his reputation for occult learnings, &lt; Anv 
otherwise unidentified, mysterious manuscript was apt, in the past, to be attributed to Bacon, especially if it concerned magic 
or alchemy and was provided with bizarre diagrams.) Rather than ascribing such a work as this to a fastidious, essentially 
conservative, and learned man such as Roger Bacon, I can far more easily imagine a small heretical society of Hermetic 
adepts and illuminab. perhaps in Germany or Eastern Europe, concealing their strange and probably dangerous doctrines in a 
secret book of the kind we see in the Voynich manuscript, I urge the interested reader to explore some of the works on Roger 
Bacon listed in the bibiiographv at the end of this monograph, and. especially, to read some of Bacon s own works 4 if on lv 
the Opus Mafuj. the sole work accessible in English J. and thus reach his own conclusions. 


51 


t 


Chapter 8 

Collateral Research: Medieval and Renaissance Cosmology and 

Iconography 

The rtmainim: chapters in this monograph art intended to provide a verv broad ‘brush survey of some background topu* 
that mav be relevant to the problem of the Vqvnich manuscript As wc have seen in Chapter 2, it seems probable in the eve-' 
of mans students that she manuscript can be dated to late medieval or earlv Renaissance times, and is ut European 
provenience, k seems, therefore, char anv sertotrc student should gain some understanding ot the sciences philosophies 
methods of representation, and other features of those periods that can put into proper Conte*: the phenomena in the 
manuscript itself, and perhaps give us some leads roward an interpretation of the drawings and the purpose and motivation 
of the work is a whole. I urge the reader 10 consider the present sketch v treatment as a mere appetizer. a sampler nr mhiic 
verv beautiful and curious prod nets of human art and wisdom that have survived the iconodasm and neglect ot relit u»l* 
reaction on the one hand, and scientific positivism on the other 

8 ,/ Ars Memorativa : The Art of Memory 

Probablv the best and most genera* treatment of the Art of Memorv is that of Yates \ 1906;. Much of the presentation 
below is taken from that excellent study. and I recommend the book to anv reader who wishes to learn more. In the lung aces 
before pencil and paper became the trusty and abundant companions of everv scholar and bureaucrat, other means had to bt 
found to organize and remember the details of complex presentations such as legal cases and public speeches Orators, 
philosophers, lawyers, and statesmen of ancient Greece and Rome prided themselves on their highly developed visual 
memories, which were so cultivated and emphasized as to be virtually eidetic m character An important Latin stiurct in tilt* 
tradition tor the Middle Ages was the Ait Htrtnntum, attributed bv medieval writers to Cicero \ Tullius' . chi* work 
described a mnemonic svirem supposed I v devised bv Simonides of Ceos \ BO. and regarded as a vital part of the 

Art of Rhetoric.’ itself an essential feature of ancient and medieval education. 

In the memorv svstem ascribed to Simonides, the orator went to a quiet, well -lighted place such as a large build me a 
forum, or some other structure provided with a series of distinct niches, columns, stairs, or other order iv architectural a no 
scenic elements. He walked about there, systematically rehearsing the ideas of his presentation, and tocussmc his attention 
upon the successive scenic units so as to associate with each a kev word or sentence of his speech, in conjunction with some 
w-eird. striking, and colorful visual image that would serve to remind him of the ideas later in their proper sequent The 
memorv images ” were to be chosen from such sources as Greek and Roman mvthoiogv and legend 

This svstem of place -memory ‘ gave us our modern word ' topic/' from the ropoi or places constituting its mam 
feature, (The medieval Stations of the Cross which have survived mto current Catholic usage today provide an example ot a 
place-memorv svstem associated with vivid visual imagery). Greek and Roman orators boasted ot the capacity of their 
artificial memories \ and competed to see who could remember the longest senes of words or ideas — well into the 
hundreds and thousands — bv means of such mnemonic methods. In addition to the Ad Htrenntum . another work, also bv 
Cicero. De Orarore, described a similar memorv svstem. A work bv Quintilian, dating from the first renturv AD. pro v idee 
dear directions for choosing Memorv "places ' and constructing images to be stored in them and associated with the ideas 
one wished to memorize. 

With the advent of Christianity, the Memorv An became a major resource tot preachers and religious educators in their 
spreading of the Christian Faith. Of the rwo great mendicant Orders of the Middle Ages — the Dominicans and 
Franciscans — each had its own favored Memorv Art for preachers. The Dominicans employed the classical art as described 
above, with colorful images drawn Irom pagan mvthoiogv and other barbaric foreign sources * in a manner which often 
seems to us startlingly and amusingly inappropriate i as mnemonic tags for Christian teachings. 

The Franciscans followed a different tradition instituted bv Ramon Lull i A.D L235- 1315&gt;. a flamboyant and innovative 
personality whose life and works arc well worth studying for their own intrinsic interest isee Peers 1929. Yaies I Mon. 

and 1966 pp, 173-198: Rossi 1961). Instead of using images. Lull s art employed a set of revolving circles ur other 


od 


I 


simple geometric figures marked with letters of the alphabet, which were manipulated in a combinatorial fashion The rinu* 
or other elemems were rotated against each other to produce all possible combinations of the letters, which could be made tu 
stand for ideas such as L ‘God'\ ' Evil". € 'Man'\ "the Soul *; for lists of sms and virtues: or for anv set of concepts nr 
elements one wished to remember and meditate upon in sequence Lull, a ‘native of Majorca, was probablv influenced bv the 
mvstical Jewish tradition of the Cabala (see 8.7 below) and also bv the Mohammedan mystical philosophy or Sufism h is 
interesting to note that Lull's combinatorial method of systematically listing and considering all possible combinations ut a 
few basic elements is a very powerful and valuable mental tool. Shorn of its medieval and religious purposes it survives mtu 
modern logic and science, and is useful to computer programmers, for example, in analyzing events in data or elements of 4 
problem f I made use of it for the scheme of crvptanalvtic hypotheses in Section 4,4,2 L It also undoubtedly inspired j number 
of cryptographic devices involving rotating discs. 

The great Divtna Commedta of Dance, and the iconography of medieval cathedrals with their ‘sermons in stone art ruo 
striking embodiments of the encyclopedic Memory Art. still valued bv and familiar to educated people todav In the 
Renaissance there was a great efflorescence of richly elaborated mnemonic systems, Giuho Camilla tA,D 1480'-I5 -i 4* 
built a wooden memory "theatre" embellished with colorful images and provided with drawers in which scripts ot speeches 
and other papers could be filed, using a "place" system of memory, the images represented such things as the planets, tht 
Cabalistic "Sephiroch." names of angels, and ocher magical and mythological elements. Giordano Bruno A.D 
1548-16001 haf entered the Dominican Order and studied their Memory Art: leaving the Order later and embarking upon 
a career as a Hrrmetic Magus i which Led ultimately to his death at the stake i. he continued to be detplv interested in 
mnemonics and taught hts own elaborate mnemonic svsrern to wealthy parrons as a wav of earning a livinc. His system, a* 
reconstructed bv Yates H966, pp. 199-230) from Brunos work De Umbris idearum (Bruno 1582), involved 4 uwni 
memory wheel which had thirty mam segments, each subdivided into five smaller ones, the w hole arranged on the plan ot 
Lull's figures so that rings within it routed independently. 

The mam segments of Bruno's wheel were labelled with twenty-three Roman, four Greek, and three Hebrew letters tor a 
total of thirty. Each of these could be combined with, or subdivided among, segments for the five vowels to product 
combinations Aa. Ae, At, Ao, Au. Ba. Be, etc. Images shown within the segments and associated with them on various nncs 
of the wheel represented elements such as the thirrv-six decans (see 83 below), the seven planets, twentv-eight mansions ot 
the moon, plants, birds, animals, stones, metals, etc., in a vast and all-embracing synthesis. This conception was not intended 
to be merely a memory device: it was basically a svstem to permit the operator to attain encyclopedic philosophical 
knowledge coupled with the magical powers of a Hermetic Demiurge Bruno founded a mvstical sea in Germany called the 
Giordanistf : their beliefs were probablv akin to those of the later Rosi crucians and Freemasons. John Dee was an admirer 
of Bruno s philosophy, which was in many wavs similar to hts own. The mnemonic an had a last magnificent echo in the 
work of Leibniz, in his design of a set of "notae" for use in a "universal calculus. The medieval and Renaissance Mem or \ 
Am undoubtedly formed the conceptual foundation and precedent for the synthetic and artificial languages which became 
fashionable m Renaissance and later times (see 9. 3 ) 

An interesting detail concerning a lost An of Memory attributed to Roger Bacon is mentioned bv Yates i I960, p 261 
fn). and bv Hajdu 11936, pp. 69-70). Yates says. "There n a rumour that Roger Bacon wrote an ars mtmorarna treatise, 
but this has not so far been traced," Hajdu refers to a work bv C. O Revendow (1843. p* 41 1, which, again, quotes a still 
older work by Von Aretin (1806). which latter I have, un form na tel v. been unable to crack down. Rcventlow s comments 
may be summarized as follows: Bacon had written a T racks t us dr Aru Mtmoranva. to be found in a manuscript at Oxford . 
this manuscript, never printed, has not so far been discovered. While Bacon was not known as a teacher of mnemonics, he 
was reported by Aretin to have employed a method based on that of "the classical authors (presumably Gccro and 
Quintilian J. 

Weuacoct f 1953. p 92) provides another very tantalizing reference to this lost mnemonic art of Roger Bacon, and j 
magical method employed bv him to teach the elements of Greek and Hebrew grammar Bacon claimed on several 
occasions that he could teach the essentials of Greek and Hebrew to the first comer within three days, sufficient to permit the 
student to read and understand foreign words in scriptural texts. Characteristically, Bacon backed up his claim with the 
forthright and combative statement. "Dabo caput meum si deficiam" f T will forfeit mv head if I fail"). 1 have. alas, been 
unable so far to discover the sourer to which Westacon refers: a work, supposedly in preparation in 1953 bv Bcrvt Smaller 
and Evelyn Jaffe. to be published in the Medieval and Renaissance Studies of the Warburg Institute, which would explain 
the magical art of language teaching employed bv the Admirable Doctor. 

Encyclopedic mnemonic systems such as those described above constituted, in effect, a sort of universal code or synthetic 
language, associated with single letters and clusters of tenets from a mixture of alphabets, and used more or less arbitrarily to 


54 


represent a variety of subject categories This is che primary source of their relevance to our present task, the stud* ot the 
Vovmch manuscript. Some such svsrem might well underlie the code-Uke structure of words demonstrated bv Tiltman in the 
Vovmch text. Manv of the circular diagrams in the manuscript, with their rows of cells in concentric circles containing 
pictures or labels or bits of text, are also reminiscent of the diagrams of LuJL CamiUo. Bruno, and others 


8.2 The Hermetic Tradition 

A set of philosophical and mystical doctrines of great conceptual richness and beaurv. the Hermetic writings were or 
primary importance during the late Middle Ages and rhe Renaissance. The besr single general treatment uf the topic is. 
again, bv Frances Yates f 1964). Another good clear overview, from a less sympathetic but still fair point of view, is that or 
Shumaker (1972). The Hermetic writings, composed bv various anonvmous Hellenistic authors around A.D 100-300. 
represented an eclectic amalgam of Platonism-. Stoic ism. Jewish and Persian philosophy, and a certain admixture of ancient 
Egyptian religious elements The doctrines became known to the Middle Ages when a monk named Leonardo da Pi stein j 
brought to Florence a Greek manuscript of what came to be called the Corpus Htrmettcum , It was translated at the urgent 
command of Cosimo de' Medici during the years 1 462 — 63 bv Marsilio Fictno iwho was himself to become a future of 
considerable prominence through his magten- medical system of astrological images and doctrines). The newly. translated 
Corpus Hffmtttcum, published in 147 L was explosive in its popularity and influence, and founded an intellectual movement 
which was to be of central importance in European thought. 

The Htrmtnc a las the entire collection of Hermetic wrinngs is called 1 were attributed to Hermes Tmmcgisrus. a 
legendary ancient Egyptian seer or god (identical with the Egyptian god of wisdom. Thoth). regarded as a recipient and 
channel of Divine illumination, and a contemporary or predecessor of Moses. Festugiere (1944-541 provides what is 
considered the most scholarly edition and commentary on the Hermencu: Scott (1924-361 gives an English translation, 
although Yates apparently does not consider it accurate ( 1964. p. 22 fnl. The Hermetic Tradition provided a motivation and 
frame of reference for astrology, magic, alchemy, and all the occult sciences which held a predominant influence in Western 
thought for manv centuries: this philosophy, as it was interpreted bv Renaissance thinkers, probably set the stace tor modern 
science and technology as well. The Hermetic doctrines frequently emphasized the almost limitless power of the human 
mind, as partaking of the Divine Mind or Nous, It seems probable that the present albencom passing hvbris of modem 
science may be traced in pan to an origin in the Promethean doctrines of Hermeticism. regarding man as a potent creative 
Demiurge, capable of standing beside God as co-regent of the natural universe John Dee. Cornelius Agnppa. Giordano 
Bruno, Marsilio Ficino. Giovanni Pico Della Mirandola. Giovanni Battista Porta, Trithermui — these and manv other 
figures of late Medieval and Renaissance philosophy drew their inspiration from the springs of the Hermetic revelations 
What was the nature of these philosophical and mystical doctrines, that gave them their power over the mind uf man 
during some of the most creative centuries of Western history.' Modern scientifically-oriented writers like Shumaker i 1972 1 
find it hard to understand their appeal. It is amusing to note that Shumaker, m his Preface, frankiv speaks of his shock and 
bewilderment at the enthusiasm of his young students, who rush up to the podium to question him eagerly after a lecture on 
Htrmetinsm In a highly interesting personal confession, he discusses his own adverse reaction to the Hermetic doctrines, his 
difficulty in comprehending the " irrational' point of view on reality embodied in them, and his inability to reconcile them 
with the positivistic attitudes of modern science with which he is so much more comfortable. 

So that the reader unfamiliar with them may gain an idea of the impact and beauty of these writings. 1 will quote two 
paragraphs of an excerpt translated bv Yates (1964. pp. 23-24 L drawn from an account of the creation of the universe and 
of man in the Ptnumdtr (one of the books of the Corpus Hermetrcum ). 

(The will of God first broughi forth i second creative power, or Nous-Demiuree. who in turn faihiuned rhr Seven Governur a i planets i to 
envelop the HAubir world with their sphere*. J Now the Nous. Father of all being*. being life and light. brought forth j Man similar tn 
himself. whom hr lowed a* hi* own child. For the Man was beautiful, reproducing rhe image of his Father fur u was mdrrc with his nun 
Form that God fell in love and xavc over to him all his works. Now. when he saw the creation which the Demiurge had fashioned m the 
fire, the Man wished also to produce a work, and per man on to do this was given hrm bi rhe Father Having thus entered mm the detmurgu 
sphere, in which he hid full power, the Man ut the works of his brother, and the Governors tell in love with him. and each irave in him 
a pare in their own rule Then, having learned then essence and having received participation in their nature, he wished to break through 
the periphery of rhe circles and w know the power of Him who retgm above che trre 

Then Man. who had full power over the wurki of mortal hemp and of animals, learn across the armature ui the spheres has in*: broker 
through their envelopes, and showed to the Nature below the beautiful form ot God When she saw that he had in him iht inexhaustible 
be a iky and aJI the entre* of che Governors, joined id the torm o! God. Nature imiird with love, hir she had seen the feature* »»f thar 


55 


nrurvekwsh beiuutul torm of Man, rcrttcred on the water and his shadow on tht earth. Ami he. having wtrn ihi&gt; form like to Immdr 
in Nature, reflected in the water, he loved her and wished to dwelt with her The momenr he wuhed this he aaiieripliiheJ it and L jmt 
to inhafei the irrational form. Then Nature havint received her Juvcd one. embraced him. and thev were united, tor thtv burned with 
love. ‘ 

83 Astrology and Astronomy 

Such a vast and complex area of symbolism is covered bv the medieval and Renaissance disciplines of astrology and 
ascronomv that onlv the briefest possible summary can be presented in these paragraphs, I will concentrate here sink on a few 
salient matters of possible relevance to the Voynich manuscript and in particular upon certain sets or senes of names and 
svmbols that might conceivably underlie some of the sequences of text strings in cells of the astrological and cosmological 
diagrams. Good general discussions of the subject may be found in Shumaker f 1972), Wedel (1920), Graubard 4 |953&gt;, 
Boll and Bczold (1931k Allen (1941). and Duhcm (191 3-1959), A detailed catalogue (with numerous illustrations! of 
Latin astrological manuscripts of the Middle Ages may he found, in Saxl (1915 and 1927 k 

The twelve months of the vear. the houses* of the zodiac signs* the association of these with Cabalistic names for the 
celestial spheres and the 'Sephiroth, ' names of angeb and demons, etc*, all form sequences of twelve important elements 
Another set of astrological svmbols is that of the fifteen major fixed stars that enter into the zodiac constellations or are in the 
path of the sun across the skv [see figure 29). The star names are of obviously Arabic origin l transmitted to the Middle Ages 
bv the Arab commentators on Greek works such as the Aimagist of Ptolemy). A twenty-eight element sequence which nuv 
be ot relevance to the Vovmch manuscript is that of the stations or "mansions" of the moon. Figure 30 show s some names 
of these stations taken from two major sources. 

An important series of thirty -six svmbols is that of the "decam/ "prosopok or 'faces* 1 of the zodiac signs. These decans, 
of which each sign has rhree. had their origin in ancient Egyptian sidereal gods of time, associated with the dailv and nrghtlv 
route of the sun among certain constellations and stars. These beings were regarded as powerful demigods or demons who 
ruled over the celestial spheres; they were often called the "horoscopes." Each exercised powers over a pan of the human 
* n ^lyptun medicine, and each was associated with one of the "nomes" or geopolitical divisions of ancient Egypt, 
Gufldel f 1936) and Seznec f 1953) provide a detailed summary of the history of the names, images, and attributes of these 
thirty-six celestial beings, from Egyptian times through classical anciquirv into the Middle Ages via such works as Picatrtx . 
and ultimately into the Renaissance and into modern astrology. Each decan. following Egyptian practice, was associated with 
a vivid graphic image; these colorful symbols were often depicted in Renaissance mosaics and frescoes, and served frequently 
as memory images tn the nchlv embellished artificial memories' of Renaissance magi such as Giordano Bruno Figure 31 
shows some stages of the development of decan names from Egyptian through Coptic and later times. Father Petersen 
collected and studied the Coptic decan names with a view to their possible relevance to the zodiac diagrams in the Vovmch 
manuscript. Unfortunately, there seem to be no cases of thirry-six elements in these diagrams, or even in the cosmological 
and astronomical diagrams (see figures II and 12), and the decan images bear little relation, either in their original 
Egyptian or later Renaissance forms, to the nude female figures in the manuscript. 

8,4 Magical Systems 

I have not found anv single work chat covers all of the systems in a scholarly manner, though separate treatments exist for 
3 num ber of the major traditions Shumaker (1972) provides a good survey of Renaissance systems under the chapter 
heading White Magic. Thorndike (1923-58) presents extremely detailed (if also rather brusque and unsympathetic) 
individual summaries of the magical philosophies of many ancient and medieval writers. Walker (1958) provides good 
coverage of some late medieval and Renaissance systems. Yates ( 1964) deals thoroughly with Giordano Bruno and some 
other philosophers of magic. Ritter and Plessner (1962) cover the Picatrix magical writings with great completeness 
Seligmann (1948) and Dc Givrv 11971) make available numerous illustrations of magic alphabets, diagrams, seals, 
talismans, etc. Mathers 1 1974) covers the Solomoman and Mathers (1975) the Abrameiinian schools or traditions of ritual 
magic. It is amusing to note chat many of these works have recently been reissued in paperback to satisfy the current 
enthusiastic surge of public interest in the occult. The following paragraphs will include onlv a few major or salient magical 
systems, with ar indication ot their character and possible relevance to the Vovnich manuscript 


-56 


8.4 J Picairix. 

A comprehensive compendium of astral and sympathetic magic. Picainx was influential from the fifteenth cenmrv on in 
European thought. Probably of Hellenistic and Arabic origin, it was translated from Arabic into Spanish at the order or 
Alfonso the Wise, in 1256, but did not become available in a Larin version until the fifteenth century, it is a rich, eclectic 
conglomeration of images, seals, characters, and incarnations based on astral and planetary demons and their powers The 
name Pjcatrjx. according to Ritter and Plessner (1962), is a medieval garbling of an Arabic name Buiqraus, which mav in 
turn be derived from the Greek “Hippocrates/" The work includes hvmns. pravers. and incantations to the planets and other 
celestial bodies; charms for all manner of purposes (to chase a wav mice and flies, prevent a sweetheart from getting pregnant, 
find loir objects. discover hidden treasure, cause people to quarrel or to make up, etc J. Many of tht names, charms, anu 
“characters ’ are referred to as “Indian"" or “Egyptian”. in fact, hieratic or hieroglyphic svmbols chat seem etaurlv Eavpuan 
are recognizable in some cases, as are Egyptian elements in spells shown in Roman letters i see figure 4U. 

I have been unable 10 find, in a careful studv of Ritter and Plessner s translation, anything that is directlv similar to am 
diagram or svmbol in the Vovnich manuscript, with one interesting exception. The “astral ' or planetarv” talismans in tht 
form of geometric figures made up of line segments interspersed with circles or dots representing constellations are strong U 
reminiscent of the odd geometrical figures adorned with faces on folio 67v2. As we will see below, similar figures were 
common in alchemical works as well land mav have had a common origin in astral magic 1 

8.4*2 Solomonian Magical Tradition. 

The Jewish historian Josephus, in the first centurv AD. mentioned a book of incantations for summoning spirits, ascribe: 
to King Solomon. A book called the ""Testament nf Solomon” refers to a magic ring given to Solomon b\ angels, whith 
conferred upon him power over various demons (whose names and functions are listed 1 Medieval writers speak of magical 
books of Solomon, and a CUvicula Salomonis and SigiUum Sahmorsts (Kev and Seal of Solomons are mentioned in a 
pamphlet written m 1456. The version translated by Mathers U974) is said to dare from the fifteenth centurv The 
Solomoman magical tradition was the best known of all medieval magical systems. S. L. MacGregor Mathers, the translater 
of this and the Abrameltman writings as well f 19751 was an interesting figure in his own right: j practicing ceremonial 
magician and head of the Rosicrucian Order of the Golden Dawn at the end of the nineteenth centurv. The Solomoman 
system depended heavily on Jewish Cabalistic sources, it features Hebrew characters and other symbols that Inok much hkr 
some of those in Ptcatnx. and arranged in similar circular "seals'* or magical diagrams Like mosr high ritual or whiter 
magic, it involved purifications, a devout religious frame of reference seeking power and guidance from God and trom o*ki 
angels, and elaborate ceremonials with incense, robes, a special room or ‘oratorv and special furnishings, etc. There seems 
to be little in this apparatus that even suggests any diagram or svmbol in the Vovnich manuscript. 

£. 4-3 Abramtlinian Magical System . 

The magical books of Abramelin were translated bv Mathers f 1975) from a French manuscript in the Biblioiheout dt 
T Arsenal dating from the seventeenth or eighteenth cemurv. This, in turn, claims to have been translated from an original 
Hebrew manuscript dated 1458, One Abraham the Jew, born 1362. is supposed to have obtained the mapt lore from an 
Egyptian magician named Abra-melin. the magical system presented is said to be based on, but not identical with, the 
Cabala, Abraham wrote the description of this philosophy for his vounger son. having presented his cider son with j 
compendium of the loftier and more highly-regarded Cabalistic tradition. The Abrameliman system is similar m its 
ceremonials, purifications, incenses, draperies, etc., as well as in its general character, to the system of Solomon discussed 
briefly above The seals and charms, however, are considerably more verbal and abstract, and more explicitly Cabalistic in 
appearance; instead of circles and pentades. they consist entirely in "magic squares' containing Roman letters representing 
Hebrew -sounding words. Long lists of demons and their functions are provided, along with detailed instructions tor usinc 
and working with these demonic powers. 

The pragmatism of some of the advice is remarkable, even startling to the unsuspecting modern reader coming upon these 
writings for the first time, I cannot resist quoting some examples; "It is not necessary w observe am ceremonies in order to 
send a wav rhe Spirits, because they themselves are onlv too glad to be far a wav from vou. (Mathers 197 5, p 9 “ - 
"Communicate unto them fthe evil spirits) also the Form in the which you wish them to appear. .You ought the evemne 
before to have demanded this from vour Guardian Angel, who knoweeh better than vou vour nature and constitution, me 
who understandeth the forms which can terrify vou. and those of which vou can support the sight ip. 90 1 Let me here 


once again inmr on The absolute necessity in occult worktni of being courteous, eten to the Evil Sptrtts , tor the Operator *ho 
is insolent and overbearing will speed* l v iai himselt open to obsession bv a Spirit ot like nature, the which will brine about 
his ultimate down fall/' I p. 102) 

Four familiar spirits were assigned to each operator in constantlv rotating six* hour shifts, he could lend them to others, 
and is advised to keep them busy and out of mischief. He can, however, also give them time off when he has nothin* tor 
them co do. "The familiar spirits are verv prompt, and thev art able to execute in most minute detail all matters of j 
mechanical nature, with the which therefore it is well to occupy (hem: as historical painting: in making statues: docks, 
weapons; , . /* ip, 362h There is an irresistible realism and psychological sophistication about all of this, which almost 
forces upon the reader the belief that the magical operator was interacting with an actual force of some kind, it least 
within his own mind. In fact, the accepted modern theory of magic, on which present-da c magicians base their thrninc 
operations, locates the powers being capped bv the magician in the depths of his own subconscious 

In spite of the great intrinsic interest possessed bv this magical tradition, it too seems, unfortunately, to be mmmwlh 
related to the drawings and general character of the Vovruch manuscript. 


8 - 4-4 John Dee's System of Spiritual Magic * 

John Det. wi h his server Edmund Kellev. developed an elaborate magical apparatus involving con vexation of, and 
comm unit i Don with, angels or good spirits. Since, as we have seen, some students feel that Dee mav have had some 
connection with the origin of the manuscript, hu magical philosophy should be of particular relevance to our usk Det 
regarded his magic as a devout religious undertaking that would bring him into closer con tan with God: Keltev was j much 
more equivocal personality, mentally unstable, of a violent and avaricious temperament, and avidlv ready to employ jnv 
means to get wealth and power. His mam interest seems to have been in alchemy, and tn a life-long endeavor to penetrate to 
the secret of making gold. To whit extent Kellev victimized and deceived Dee cannot be guessed, but it mav have been 
considerable, since all of the ” angelic “ messages were recaved bv. and transmitted by Kellev. Dee himself had, as he 
confessed, no ability whatever to see the visions in his crystal or hear the angel voices, and was apparently entirely dependent 
on Kellev On the other hand, some writers have suggested that Dee was subtle exploiting Kellev for his own purposes, and 
tolerated his treachery and his ill-natured outbursts for this reason h is hard to imagine, in anv case, how either of the two 
men could have invented so elaborate and remarkable a system wirhour the knowing cooperation of the other 

Dee s angel names arc reminiscent of Cabala, and have a strong Hebrew flavor: his magical svstem as a whole, however, n 
said bv Deacon f 1968) to be quite distinct from anv other well-known Cabalistic or Hermetic tradition. It included a 
synthetic language of great complexity, in which Urge volumes of text were communicated to Dee and Kellev bv various 
angels, and which employed an invented alphabet: this language and alphabet mav be of relevance to research on tht 
Vovnich manuscript. They will be described, along with the practices and circumstances accompanying their revelation to 
Dee and Kellev, in Section 9.4 below Dee s connection with the Rosicrueian movement, his philosophy in general, and the 
nature of the "hieroglyphic" manuscript in his possession will be discussed in Seen on 8.9, For more information regarding 
Dee i angelic magic, see Casaubon (1659), Deacon fl968L Dee f 1963, 1968 j, Fell- Smith (1904), French i 19 ~2i and 
) os ten ( 1965 ). 


8.5 The Galenic Medical T radition 

Galen, according to Thorndike ( 1923—58), wrote a voluminous medical encyclopedia f twenty books of about 1000 pages 
each) about A,D, 129 These works are not well known to modern readers, and are described by Thorndike as relative) v 
inaccessible ", The humoral svstem of medicine, ascribed originally to Hippocrates, was elaborated bv Galen and bv medieval 
Arabic commentators such as Haly ben Rod wan, R hazes. Haly Abbas, and Avicenna The tradition was predominant in 
Europe over a long period of time, and survived in some form up until quite recently: it continues to thrive, in more or less 
concealed forms, in much modern "folk" medicine. Good general treatments of earlv medical historv may be found in Singer 
and Underwood ( 1 962). Singer (1928, 1959L and Taylor fl 9221. 

Jn the Galenic system, food was processed bv the human body through four stages or disgesiioos", each of which 
produced a nourishing product to be passed on to the next stage, and a waste product to be excreted. The "humors — blood, 
vellow (or ruddy I bile, black bile, and phlegm — were the excreta of certain stages of digestion. The words ‘ melancholic. 

choleric," phlegmatic/' and sanguine which soil survive in our language to describe temperament or personality, arc 
survivals of the names of the four humors. Each of the humors had certain "natural qualities", which gave it its influence on 


58 


the human bodv. temperament, and mind These were combinations of cold, warm, wet. and drv. Depending upon the 
balance among the four humors in the constitution of a particular individual, he was said to have a particular “complexion 
Disease arose, according to the Galcmc theory, from a serious imbalance among the humors and their natural qualities 
Similarly changes in this balance accounted for the different cons rinse to ns of vouch, maturin', and old age The balance 
differed also with the seasons, and in the constitutions of the sexes; different foods, herbs, and other substances had 
important effects on the balance of the humors and their qualities, and were considered to have characteristic qualities oi 
their own. The celestial bodies each had a crucial influence on the organs of the human bodv, the digestions, and all the 
other dements of the theory. The "microcosm" or "small world" of the human body was held to reflea in miniature alt the 
relations and influences at work within the macrocosm" or universe as a whole 

The medical treatments employed bv the Galenic phvsiaan took careful cognizance of the positions ol the heavenly 
bodies, and certain "critical days" were singled out, on which certain treatments could not safelv be applied Cathartit 
t purgative 1 expedients acting upon particular humors were an important part of therapy For example, the herbs sage and 
betony were supposed to draw and purge phlegm and water; rhubarb acted on choler &lt; yellow bile!; and senna purged 
melancholy (black bile). Blood was purged bv the obvious method of opening a vein and bleeding the patient 
("phlebotomy"), Thus, the Galenic physician was a skilled practitioner of "cathartic and phlebotomy 

Heat and moisture were hrghlv important in the Galenic therapies. Heat was the principle oflifr. greatest at birth and 
earlv vouch, it was thought to become gradually exhausted and cooled with advancing age. Old age involved an excess ot 
coldness and drvness, so that warm baths and applications of warm oils and unguents were recommended fur the elder U 
Another sovereign remedy for the bad effects of old age was the contact or embrace of a young person or animal, enabling 
the aged person to regain some of his lost hear and moisture by contagion from the superabundance m the younger creature 
The roval road to health could lead, thus, to a warm puppy, or better soil, a youthful maiden. Astrological and astronomical 
lore were obviously also of great importance in Galenic therapy; the phvsiaan almost had to be a practicing astrologer us 
well. The "medical month" consisted of rwentv -eight dan fa number which recurs in the diagrams of the Vovmch 
manuscript) , and the influence of the moon was of considerable importance through its effect on moisture and the tides. 

Roger Bacon, in his medicinal work (Bacon 1928a). provides an extremely complete, dear, and detailed explanation of 
astrology as it related to medicine (and WichingTon, in hts preface to rhe work, gives an excellent general summary of 
Galenic doctrines and Bacon's contributions and sources as well). Figure M shows some saltern features of Galenic medicine 
m "fours" ; some of the terms mav well underlie the labels and text strings in certain cosmological and astronomical draw ings 
in the manuscript, and possibly tn the zodiac diagrams also. They mav be involved in the "human figure drawings as well; 
the omnipresenr puffs of vapor or foam could well represent the humor or qualities, the digestions, etc. Terms referring to 
degrees of coldness, warmth, wetness, and drvness may even be concealed in the text of herbal folios, as fhev are frequently 
mentioned in anaent and medieval her bah as properties of medicinal plants. 

8,6 Ars Notoria; Demonic and Angelic Magic 

I have found relatively little material directly concerning this topic, although it is mentioned tn passing in manv of the 
works cued in Section 8 1 above. Yates ( 1966) describes it as a magical art of memory, using ' shorthand notae or symbols, 
and regarded as a verv black kind of magic. Walker H958) discusses certain systems of "spiritual magic in considerable 
derail Thorndike (1923-58) characterizes An Notoria as an an designed to gam knowledge of and to communicate with 
God bv the invocation of angels, using mystical characters and prayers; he also dismisses all the material as "meaningless 
jumbles of diagrams and magic words" without telling us much more about it. The essence of the Ars Notoria seems to have 
been the use of angels 1 and demons names, and an attempt to exploit these intermediaries as channels of illumination and 
power from God Tnthemius ( S$eg*nographia w 1606). the Solomoman and Abramelmian magical systems, and 

John Dee s magical practices all made hetvv use of invocations directed to demons and spina. Figure 33 shows some lists of 
names from various systems, and figure 32 provides some examples of the seals, talismans, and diagrams employed to invoke 
and control these beings. The spirits were intricately connected with the four directions, the elements, the celestial spheres 
and other cosmological entities, and so mav have been named on some of the Vovmch manuscript folios 

8,7 Cabala 

The nmutal Jewish philosophy known as Cabala lor Kabbalah l developed in Spain during the Middle Ages. A thirteenth- 
cemurv book called the Zohar. originating in Spam, was an important source of Cabalistic lore for later writers The Cabala 


59 


depended heavily on manipulation of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet and lists of sacred words, and was in central hicfah 

verbal' and abstraa in character, in contrast to the iconic, visual qualm of mam other magical systems The names of Gi»d 
and of angels and the Hebrew letter s were employed in wavs strong! v suggesting to us. today. cryptologic techniques &gt; and. m 
fact, the manipulations of the Cabala mas have inspired at least some eariv cryptographic devices*. "Magic squares” were ,i 
prominent feature of the system, Ten basic elements called the ’Sephiroth ' were essential to the doctrine, these were 
supposed to represent the powers or attributes of God. and were associated with other entities &lt; ten spheres of rhe universe. 
etc.J in a typical medteval table of correspondences (see figure 35 1 The Hebrew letters were all associated with unique 
numerical values and a Cabalistic method called M femama” permitted alternative words havtne the same numerical values ft* 
be substituted for sen uf names such as the Sephirorh Another Cabalistic art called temurah ' involved anacramminc 
sacred words. 

Most of the major magical svstems of later times made at least some use of Cabala. Hebrew lure and the Hebrew Ungu jcc 
and alphabet were regarded, because of their Biblical association, as especially holv* ancient, and magically potent &gt;X'hile 
the imagery and "feel” of the Vovnidi manuscript does not seem verv close! v akin to the dry. abstract and ascetic 
atmosphere of Cabala, the importance of the doctrine and of the Hebrew words originating in it to medieval magic in genera] 
make it worthwhile for a student of the manuscript to be at least superficially familiar with it. We have seen above (5. 1 i that 
New bold attempted to use a Cabalistic principle involving all combinations of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet taken two at 
a time as a pan of hts decipherment method. This, in itself, seems to have been an tmrenmus and rather reuvnfiilblt 
hypothesis, however mistaken it has turned nut to have been General coverage of Cabala rtuv be found in Blau * hM-t , 
Mathers f 195 U, and ^JTaiie i 1929i. 

8,8 Alchemy 

The topic of alchemv has been dealt with bv many writers in mans different wavs. Shumaker t 19^2j and Graubard 
M 95 3 1 present good general treatments, and Thorndike i 1925-58* discusses alchemv in passing as he describes the writings 
of various ancient and medieval practitioners. Singer 11928-311 provides a comprehensive catalogue of alchemical 
manuscripts, and an equally comprehensive listing of alchemical terms and symbols mav be found in Gessman U922i 
Ashmoic 0652* presents a large and valuable collection of old manuscripts, permitting the reader to gain an excellent 
feeling for the nature and scvle of their texts and illustrauom. 

The origin of alchemv apparently cannot be traced back to anv one source with am certainn It was artnbured to the 
Egyptians. Babylonians. Jews, and perhaps even to the Hindus and Chinese. Medieval writers ascribed its origin to Hermes 
Trismcgmus. and much of the alchemical lore that came down to the Middle Ages probably had its source among the 
Alexandrian Greeks in rhe eariv Christian era. ft was transmitted to Europe from the Arab world through a translation m 
1 144 of a work entitled ' B&lt;iok of the Composition of Alchemv Interest in alchemv was long-lived, continuing into the 
seventeenth centurv when it began to decline: the eighteenth centurv is regarded as the end of its real influence Elias 
Ashmole lA.D 1617-1693. founder in 1683 of the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, the first public museum in the 
British Isles), was perhaps the last prominent enthusiast for alchemv. 

The doctrines of alchemv covered a verv broad range of technical practices and natural phenomena; it is difficult indeed to 
disentangle its intimate intermingling of Galenic medicine, philosophical and religious mysticism (Christian and pagan*, 
mythology, astrology, botany, /oology, miner a log v and primitive chemistry. It was an all -embracing magical or religious 
philosophy as well as a more or less operational set of techniques. There were two main forms of alchemy; practical alchemv 
was the actual attempt to create new compounds or substances bv chemical operations, and prominently, of course, the 
attempt to produce or multiply gold. It arose, in all probability, from eariv metal-working and smelting lore passed down 
through the ages from eariv man in the Near East. Theoretical alchemv. on the other hand, was a philosophical doctrine 
about the nature of the universe and of matter: an eclectic amalgam of Gnosticism, Neo- Platonism. Christian mistical 
doctrines, and pagan mythology There was no hard-and-fast line drawn between these two branches of the arc. tvpicallv. 
each practitioner of alchemv struck his own preferred balance between the smoke, smells, and gadgetrv of the laboratory and 
the quiet of the study or the oratory of the magus. 

It was customary for an adept m alchemv, especially one who claimed to have attained some praaical success, to adopt a 
son" or heir to whom he would pass on his wisdom at his death. Elias Ashmole was ’’adopted' in this wtv bv an older 
alchemist named WjlJiam Backhouse: Ashmole himself apparently never attempted the laboratory operations of practical 
alchemv bur contented himself with reading and collecting manuscripts and studving the symbols and concepts of theoretical 
aic hem v Almost all alchemical writings were routinely couched in a highly mysterious, deliberately misleading and 
metaphorical language, codes and ciphers were commonly employed in the manuscripts, and extreme secrecy was the rule 


60 


In essence. us tar as modern writers Have been able to guess from the convoluted secret writings that have comedown to 
u sj alchemy was based on a rheorv involving a fundamental constituent of all nature called the first matter or hvle 
individual objects gained their characteristic identities that made them what they were instead of something else* through 
the addition of qualities such as the cold* moisture, dryness and heat of Galenic medicine. In order w transmute an object 
into another object, one must remove the "qualities ' of one nature, get back to the neutral first matter . then add or cast 
on" the qualities" of the desired nature (usually those of gold). This process involved elaborate sequences ol manipulations 
m the alchemist s ' laboratory' that might occupv months or vears. cmplov the services of manv helpers, and consume 
incredible amounts of monev and effort. Practical alchemv was a feasible hobbv for onlv the richest of men. 

The laboratorv operations included a lone list of activities which are variously rand, needless to sav, mvstenuush defined 
m the manv alchemical treatises. Thev are described bv terms such as calcination* solution, putrer action, congelation 
fermentation, exaltation, and projection. The products ©! these processes And their appearance and behavior in the laboratory 
glassware" or vessels were described in wildb metaphorical wavs ( a biack residue was ' the raven' or the crow s head ■ a 
corrosive acid was "the green lion' . ocher substances were called the snowv swan ", the toad that cats his fill , the 
dragon ', etc.). Substances were referred to as "medicine, ' "menstrual fluid.' "blood. " etc., or labelled with the names of 
parts of the human bodv. Metaphors were taken from human social life T marriage' or wedding." ' copulation. death 
and "burial"), and religion ("the passion of Christ, " "resurrection. purification. redemption"! In tact, almost any 
name a anv natural or artificial object or process could appear as a cover -word" for some alchemical process or product 

Et is mv own opinion that the Voinich manuscript could well be. at least in part, an alchemical treatise 1 feel that thi* 
hypothesis explains the secrecv and mvsienousness of its form, the difficulty of deciphering u or recognizing its draw ings in 
am' conventional herbal or astrological illustrations of the times, and rhe apparent encyclopedic character of its concern. In 
fact, the onlv two drawings 1 have found chat have anv dose kinship in stvle or treatment to those in the manuscript are two 
illustrations in Ashmoie s Tbeatmm Chemicum Brttannicum i 1652). These are: a drawing of a plane, lunanu . on p 3-lb. 
and a ivmbolic represent a non of an alchemical operation on p 350 Both of these are in a group of manuscripts of Ash mole * 
collection which are identified, alas, only as ' anonvmi The text, in paired lines of Old English verse, discusses herbs. 
Christian mystical platitudes, astrological matters, etc. in the usual wildlv heterogeneous conglomeration. It is apparently 
much farther toward the "theoretical" or philosophical end of the spectrum than the practical. 

The plant figure has manv of the odd sivlistic features of the Voynich manuscript 5 herbal folios: the ngidh svmmctnc.il 
arrangements of leaves and flowers; the "molded plastic", block v. or sculpturesque forms: the platform wirh abrupt edited 
having a "cut out" look on which the plant is sifting, verv similar in stvle to some root forms on the Voynich manuscript 
plant folios. 

The other figure has elements resembling some of those in the folios showing nude human figures in tubs at liquid, A 
doud-like form at the top. from which conventionalized ra vs emanate, represents God. immediately below, the figure ut .i 
man or angel breathes into rhe mouth of a bulbous alchemical vessel, his breath is clearly indicated in exactly the *av that 
the vapors or liquids are shown passing through the elaborate "plumbing ' on the Vovmeh manuscript folios. On the vessei 
are a sun [with a face) above and within a crescent moon: from each of these, vapors or emanations are shown descending 
through the vessel. The round botiom of the vessel is provided with seven spouts, spaced around its curved circumference 
and the vapor emerges from all ot these and trickles down over two nude, plump human figures locking arms and hold me 
hands; these figures, while bener drawn than the Vovmeh manuscript nudes, are short- legged and "hippv'\ w t ch tar 
tummies, in a verv similar stvle. Two dragons standing on their heads and a toad complete the composition The stvle of the 
seven spouts on the vessel is so close to that of similar spouts and vents on the pipe-iike forms in the manuscript as to be 
aimost indistinguishable, and the symbolic use of conventionalized forms to create a new synthetic whole with a complex 
meaning also seems closely akin to the methods ot the Vovmeh manuscript s scribe or scribes While chest drawings art 
identified onlv as anonymous in Ashmole s collection, 1 have discovered some highly similar figures in ocher works where 
thev are associated with the writings of George Ripley, a fifteenth -cent urv alchemist who produced numerous treatises with a 
strong Christian flavor (Philalethes 1678, Rrplev 159L E756L De Rola (1973. figure 64 1 shows a figure similar to the 
second described above, citing us source as De Errorrbuj* bv John Dastin f British Museum. Eg ere or 845 folio Pvi 

In anv case, k seems likeiv that a thorough examination of alchemical manuscripts and their illustrations might amply 
repav the efforts of am - student who could gam access to them. 

83 The Rosicruda n Movement and John Dee 

While Dr John Dec has already been mentioned quite frequently in this monograph, it remains to provide a fuller 
discussion of his thought, his writings, and his connection with the Rosicrucian movement, a philosophical tradition whirh 


61 


mav. itself, have some bearing on the Vovmch manuscript There are a number of good treatments of John Dee s life and 
thought, nocablv Deacon (1968). Fell-Smith (1904). and French (1972). Yates (1972) covers the earlv Rosier urian 
movement verv thoroughly, and deals with Dee in that context. Dee s private diary (Dee 1842) and a hit of the manuscripts 
m his large collection \ James 1921 ) are of considerable (though leu general ) interest. 

The Rou crucian movement, centering m the Palatinate region of Germany but having wide-ranging repercussions in 
other European countries, was essentially an attempt to liberalize religious and philosophical thinking: it combined the rich 
heritage of the Hermetic tradition with Christian mysticism and a generous admixture of alehcmv. Cabala, magic, and 
medicine The Rosicrucians were fanatically secretive. The authors of the original Ron crucian 'manifestoes'' (the Fama and 
the Confeino, both reproduced in translation in Yates 1972) never revealed their identities. Thev claimed to have founded j 
' brotherhood/' and appeared to invite new adherents; all attempts on the part of would-be recruits to get in touch with the 
founders seem to have been fruitless and certainly received no open response (although there may have been some well* 
concealed contacts and acn vines behind the icenesh 

The Rosknidan doctrines, like those of alchemy to which they are dosciv akin, manifested a highly devious and 
convoluted use of symbols and imagery. To the amalgam of devices familiar tn alchemy, the Rosicrucians added political 
symbolism related to the prominent conflict between Protestant nations and leaders, organized around Frederick V (Elector 
Palatine of the Rhine, and married to Princess Elizabeth, daughter of James 1 of England) and the reactionary Catholic 
house of Habsburg These quasi -political symbols with religious and mvstical overtones included the Habsburg eagle, the 
Palatine lion, the red rose, images related to the Order of the Garter/' and svmboh taken from or akin to those m John 
Dee s writings, especially his Monas Hieroglyphic* (Dee 1564. 1964 L 

John Dee. according to Yates, 'belonged emphatically to the Renaissance Hermetic tradition, brought up to date with 
new developments, and which he further expanded in original and important directions' ( 1972. p. xnJ. Later, on the same 
page, she describes Dee s contributions as follows: 'In the lower elemental world he studied number as technology and 
applied sciences. . . . in the celesnal world, his study of number was related to astrology and alchemy, and in his Monas 
Hiero%lyphica he believed he had discovered a formula for a combined cabahsi. alchemical and mathematical science which 
would enable its possessor to move up and down rhe scale of being from the lowest to the highest spheres. And in the 
supercelestial sphere Dee believed that he had found the secret of conjuring angels by numerical computations in the cabalist 
tradition /' 

Dee s influence was earned to the European continent, where he made extensive visits from 1 58 3 on. He was. according 
to Yates, verv active tn surring up new movements in Central Europe, though his work there has been studied less thoroughly 
than his life in England. It would seem that Dee was somewhat of an intellectual leader in Bohemia, not oniv m alchemy, 
bui in a religious reform movement, the nature of which has not yet been investigated and explained fullv. Most of the events 
discussed in Yates treatment of Dee and the Rosicrucians probably look place after the Voynich manuscript was already in 
existence. It seems to me verv likely, however, that there is some kinship between the philosophy underlying the manuscript 
and the Rosicrucian tradition. Because of the known association of the manuscript with Rudolph's court and possiblv also 
with Dee. and the obvious similarity of its secretive, synthetic symbolism to that of the Rosier uciarn. a serious studem can 
scarcely afford to ignore anv of this highly in t ere sti ng material. 

A brief word should be said concerning the "hieroglyphic manuscript ' which Dee was reputed to have had tn his 
possession, and which some wnters have identified with the Voynich manuscript. The letter written in 1675 bv Sir Thomas 
Browne to Elias Ash mole, and reporting the words of Arthur Dee. John Dee's son. concerning this mysterious manuscript, is 
quoted bv Fell-Smith (1904) as follows: "The transmutation [to gold) was made by a powder they had. which was 
found in some old place, and a book lying by it containing nothing but hieroglvphicb; which book his [Arthur sj father 
bestowed much time upon, but I could not hear that he could make it out.' (p. 311). Arthur Dee. born 1579. was 
apparent! v eight years old it the time he saw the events he describes. 

Another history related bv Fell-Smith probably records the origin of the manuscr ipt and the powder "ICeUev is reputed to 
have been wandering in Wales. . .when he stumbled upon an old alchemical manuscript and two caskets or phials containing 
a mysterious red and white powder/' (p. 77). It was Kelley, in anv case, who brought the powder and the manuscript to Dee 
when thev first became acquainted. In fact, one gams the definite impression chat Kellev's original purpose m seeking Dee 
our ( under an assumed name at first) was to gain his assistance, and probably his monetary backing, for an attempt to puzzle 
out the meaning of the manuscript and to use the powders to make gold 

Dec s diary, as edited by Halliwell (Dee 1842) provides no further information concerning the manuscript or the powder 
] os ten. however, in a highly interesting recent article U965J. describes a portion of the diary that had been discovered m a 
source separate from the remainder; this excerpt does, indeed, contain considerable information on the matter It records in 


62 


great detail an incident during the time when Dee and Kelley were engaged in communication with the angels. the spirits 
instructed them, through Kellev, to destroy all their precious books and occulta, including the hieroglyphic manuscript and 
the powder. This sacrificial act, intended to be a test of their high purity of purpose and submission to God * will, required 
their placing the objects into a furnace (undoubtedly a pan of the furnishings of their alchemical laboratory! and permitnnc 
them to be consumed by the fire. 

This ceremony or bit of sleight of hand (for it was apparently an elaborate deception, either worked on Dee by Kellev for 
some purpose known only to his unbalanced and unscrupulous mind, or else perpetrated bv both men for some unknow n 
common purpose upon a third party) was duly accomplished: the next dav. all the "destroyed arcana miraculously 
reappeared, to be rediscovered whole and undamaged bv Kellev in the ashes of the furnace. The description of the 
ceremonial burning includes a tantalizing glimpse of the hieroglyphic manuscript itself, which is described as being small bui 
written m letters "larger*' than those of usual writing, and to have been stored in a velvet bag or sack. 

On his break with Dec in .Prague. Kellev kept most of the magic powder; what ultimately became ot the manuscript is not 
reported in any of the sources 1 have consulted. It seems likely that Kelley kept that also (since it had apparent! v been his 
from the beginning) and subsequently sold or relinquished it to Rudolph. Unfortunately, the mere characterization of this 
book as being "in hieroglyphics" is not enough to warrant a secure identification with the Voynich manuscript, since manv. 
if not most, alchemical treatises were couched in secret characters. It was more usual, however, for the secret symbols to be 
mterm xcd with Latin or some other more familiar letters after the fashion of a rebus. It also seems likelv that Dee would 
have been familiar with ihe alchemical symbols, and would have had no trouble in making some sense out of them, however 
little success he may ha ^attained in making gold according to their instructions. Section 9.4 provides a somewhat fuller 
discussion of alchemical symbols, and figure 42 shows some examples. 

8.10 The History of the Hindu* Arabic Numerals 

In view of the strong possibility that some, at least, of the Vovnich symbols may be early forms of numerals, something 
should be said about the origin and development of these numerals in Europe. Figure 16 shows a sample of some carlv 
numeral forms that bear a resemblance to some Vovnich script characters. Two good general studies of the origin of Arabic 
numerals are Hill (1915) and Smith and Karptnski (1911). The original birthplace of the numerals is veiled m uncertainty 
they could have come from Egvpt, Persia, China, or Mesopotamia. Their history can. however, be ciearlv traced in India and 
then in their very gradual adoption in Europe. The Hindu system of numerals, including place value and a svmbol for 
"zero", was transmitted to the Arabs at a relatively early date. Smith and Karpmski trace the first introduction of the Hindu 
numerals to a visit A.D. 77 £ bv a Hindu astrologer to the court of the Caliph, where his astronomical tables were translated 
into Arabic. Ocher Arab math en&gt; a no a ns (among them Al-Khowarazmi, who gave his name, in the form algorism or 
algorithmi/' to arithmetical calculation using the new numerals, and ultimately to our modern algorithm &gt; based their 
tables and computations on that translated work. 

Arab writers continued to use the new numbers, consistently referring to them, and the arithmetic based on them, as 
"Indian" well into the thirteenth century. The adoption of the numerals into Europe is hard to pin down exactly; Smith and 
Karpmski attribute it to the travels of merchants and traders in Spain, where Arab influence was strong, as earlv as the ninth 
or tenth century. Numerous visits to the Near and Far East were made bv traders and missionaries throughout the Middle 
Ages: the travels of the Brothers Poli were unusual only in the thoroughness of their documentation and the interest they 
have aroused in modern times. These travelers brought back many bits and pieces of foreign lore, some of it remarkable in 
the wealth of its detail and vividness of description. The Hindu* Arabic numerals undoubtedly became known at least to some 
through these accounts. One form of the numerals, employed in conjunction with the abacus, became known to Europeans 
under the names " characters " or "apices," and involved unusually bizarre and ornate varieties of the symbols. 

The adoption of the new numbers in Europe was an extremely slow matter. They seem to have been known or mentioned 
by some writers for a considerable time before they came into anything like general use. They were not employed bv 
merchants for the practical calculations of commerce until surprisingly late. Leonardo Fibonacci of Pisa, bom about 1175. 
did much to introduce the numerals to Europeans. His Liber Abaci, written in 1202 and rewritten in 1228. explained the 
new numbers and used them as they would be employed in the usual computations of business. The methods he presented 
were rejected both by the conservative mercantile class and bv university circles, according to Smith and Karpmski ip, 131). 
The bankers of Florence were forbidden to use the new numerals in 1299, and "the statutes of the University of Padua 
required stationers to keep the price lists of books non per Ctfm, sed per iiteras Claras'", Ip. 133), 


63 


Still the new system made some headway from 1275 on. It is interesting to note that the common folk of Northern 
European nations Like Germany rarely used Arabic numerals before the sixteenth centurv. The invention of cheap paper, lead 
pencils, and modern methods of multiplication and division did not come about until quite recently: these were the 
developments that, according to Smith and Karpmski, rcallv made the new ' algorism'" attractive and practical for evervdav 
use. Before that time, the Arabic numerals were employed primarily on coins, for numbering the pages of manuscripts, and 
for dates, Thev are often found intermingled in bizarre wavs with Roman numerals: e.g,. "’IVGjj" for 1502 ": 
"NFCCCC^O" for T45G': and ‘M.CCCCSii ' for "1482". In the early and transitional phases tif their adoption, the 
numerals or "ciphers * were regarded as incomprehensible, mysterious, strange, and well-suited for use as cryptic symbols in 
secret writing systems. 


8 . 1 1 Medieval and Renaissance Costume 

The clothing of some of the human figures on the pages of the Vovnich manuscript should afford us some due as to eht 
dare and provenience of the work. Unfortunately, the drawing is so sketchy, and the figures are so small and lacking m 
detail that there is disappointingly little to go on. A wide vanerv of hats and headgear are in evidence, even on figures 
otherwise entirely nude , these include a variety of diadems, tiaras and crowns as well as wide-brimmed hats, floppy tam-u- 
shanters, and hats provided with ribbons, veils, or plumes falling over the wearer's -Shoulder or back. Dress of women and 
perhaps also men includes a sort of long pleated robe with wide sleeves (see Virgo and one of the Gemini twins, figure 10 
Verv common ts a kind of knee-length. pleated tunic belied at the warn isee Sagittarius, figure 10) Costumes of this type 
were common during the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries throughout Europe, There seem to be no examples of 
more extreme styles; the tall conical hats or rwo-horned headgear for women: the exaggeratedly puffed pantaloons and huift 
ruffled collars for men in style after about 1550: or the curly-coed shoes, very short tunics over skin-tight pants with 
codpieces that were the height of fashion somewhat earlier. The garments shown, however sketchiiv. on the Vovnich 
manuscript folios seem quite simple and restrained on the whole, and provide relatively little decisive information Thev seem 
to me, from an admittedly superficial study, to be consistent with a date between 1 450 and 1550 (see Von Boehn 1*&gt;64 for a 
well -illustrated treatment of sixteenth-century costume). Some typical hat and dress forms from the Vovnich manuscript are 
shown m figures 10 and J7, 


64 


Chapter 9 

Collateral Research: Artificial and Secret Languages 

Laic medicv.il and Renaissance philosophy included a vigorous imeresr m synthetic languages of mam* kinds: thtsv were 
variously intended tor concealment of secrets. expression ot mystical religious ideas, abbreviated and compact transcription or 
text, nucr Ungual communication, and an encyclopedic mnemonic representation of human knowledge. As has been the Last 
throughout these chapters on collateral research, 1 can present here onlv the barest suggestion of the material available to the 
interested reader 

9.1 Brachygraphy: The History of Shorthand 

The ancient Greeks employed a svstem ot abbreviations called Tironian Hand or Notation, ascribed to Xlarcus Tulhu' 
Tiro in the first centurv before Christ i see Rose 1874* Allen 1889, Boge 1973*. New bold attempted to use each Greek 
abbreviations in his decipherment method , as we saw in Chapter 5. Manv later svstem s of abbreviations in Roman anc 
medieval times were inspired bv. or based on. this earlv Greek svstem, Figure 38 show's an interesting example of a medieval 
shorthand svstem derived from the Greek methods: its strokes are made up of pans of the letters a through V and earh 
forms of the Hindu -Arabic numerals This mtem. caJled "Notana Aristoteiis by its author, an English monk ot the 
thirteenth centurv* is of interest because of the resemblance of some of its symbols to the Vovruch characters (probably, in 
mv opinion, due to the derivation of both from earlv numeral forms i . These symbols acted as bases* to which dots, lines, ere., 
were added to form words, Roger Bacon was reported bv johnen l L940. p. 34 i to have been familiar with the Tironian 
Notation, which he called *'ars no tat on a \ 

Cappcih 11949) presides a summary of the history ot Latin abbreviation systems and cherr development from classical 
mto medieval times, The Roman svstem made use of several devices single letters could stand for entire words or svllublt&gt; 
words could also be truncated or contracted* usually being provided with a mark or symbol showing that something had been 
omitted i a tail or curlicue extending upward or downward* a line or curve above certain letters, a slam line, etc . * Figure 1 “ 
shows some Latin abbreviations used in the Middle Ages that resemble characters of the Vovnich script Among central 
works dealing with the histon of shorthand and covering the earliest systems are Gmlieni ' l%8i and Johnen &lt; l L Mii 
Alston t 1 966 j provides a bibliography of works on the subject. 

Most earlv European or English shorthand systems I have examined are designed around simple lines and curves, to which 
dots, dashes, circles, hooks* etc,, are attached ar various positions to form compound symbols standing tor whole words Must 
ot these earlv systems were not phonetic. " i.e,* thev made linie or no attempt ro show the sound of words independently of 
spelling conventions as modern systems do In fact, the earlv systems tended more toward an ideographic or symbol a 
representation of ideas, although alphabetic elements were also involved. All of the systems were extremely elaborate, 
requiring the memorization of vast arrays of arbitrary symbols that were difficult to write accurately and quickly, the modern 
reader can only wonder how anvone ever managed to learn or remember their large numbers of rules and forms, or to record 
the tinv docs and hooks with sufficient precision to permit distinguishing them later in attempting to read back w hat they had 
written These methods certainly seem to have required far more effort chan ordinary wrtnng. 

Duthie f 1970) provides an interesting comparison of three major systems in existence dunne Eliza berhan rimes. At least 
one of them mav have been emploved ro record some of the texts of Shakespeare s plavs during actual performances, so thei 
must have been usable to some extent. ] will summarize below, in highly abbreviated form. Duthie s presentation* the three 
systems seem typical of the methods available in the sixteenth and earlv seventeenth centuries Thar authors intended them, 
apparently, not simply for Transcription of speech as modern systems are emploved. but also for rapid and condensed writing, 
as a concealment method* and as a sort of elegant, philosophical mode of representing ideas' . 

9 */*/ Characterie (Thomas Bright* circa 1 5S8)* 

Figure 38 shows the basic strokes and the subsidiary elements to be added to each in Bright s system Each of the eighteen 
base symbols consisted of a vertical line with a distinguishing hook, curlicue* etc., on its top; these svmboJs could be written 


65 


in four different positions I vertical, horizontal, slanted left, slanted right). In addition, to the loot ot each base svmbtil imt oi 
twelve additional squiggles could be added, making 864 combined symbols tor use to represent common words; these were 
called "characteral! words' 1 Other words not in this basic list were expressed bv ' associating them as tvncmvms or 
antonvms to a "cbaracrerall word 11 . and prefixing to it the first- letter base svmbol of the actual word, to serve as a sort of 
determinant (see the examples in figure 58 1. As Duthte remarks, this ivstem was primitive and cumbersome, placing a great 
burden on the memorv of its user, and producing forms which were verv easv to garble and confuse 

9*1.2 Brachy graphic (Peter Bales* circa 1590). 

Bales ivstem employed ordinary Roman letters in combination with dots, commas, and accent s i collective ji called h* 
Bales eictlcs ‘L which had to be very carefully and accurately placed around the letters to avoid contusion T hr 
combinations of letters and "utiles* 4 produced symbols for a basic list of common words as in Bright s svsrem, and similarly 
synonyms and antonyms were shown bv using the base-word symbol with an extra stroke on the right or left. This shorthand 
method required the memorizing of over 500 different srmboh; great precision in the placement of the tittles was 
mandator v in order to avoid garbles. Jt does not seem to have been any more practical than Bright s svstem 

9 - 13 Stenographic (John Willis, 1602). 

Duthic finds Sonographic the best of the three, and considers it to be the foundation ot modern shorthand systems Figure 
38 shows the twenrv-six basic strokes, called "unchangeable particles . these were partly phonetic, and silent letters were 
largely suppressed in writing words. A circle added to the foot of a stroke provided an h sound, and dots arranged in five 
clockwise positions around the basic stroke stood for vowels. Abbreviated forms of words were built up bv combining these 
dementi in a manner somewhat like modern methods, Willis svstem is. in fact, verv much like the later Pittman svstem 
f which mav well have been derived from ill, Duthie judges chat Stenographic could have been employed to record slow, 
careful speech in condensed form, but not for rapid verbatim reporting. If is interesting to note that Willis called his svstem 
Steganographie as well as Stenographic, and considered it appropriate for concealment of secrets. 

In summary, it seems unlikely that any of these svstems or others related to them are closelv akin to the Vovmch script 
The onlv clement among the Vovmch symbols that bears anv resemblance to the dots, dashes, hooks, and tittles ot the 
carlv shorthand methods is the hook or curlicue that appears frequently over the double-c'" character ^ w to turm 
C^t There seems to be no visible structure of auxiliary marks added to a recurrent set of base symbols. It seems 
considerably more reasonable, in mv opinion, to look for relationships between the Vovmch characters and medie\ul Latin 
abbreviations, with some earlv numeral forms (see Section 4.1.2 and figures 16. 171- 

9.2 Steganography: The Early History of Cryptology 

There are records of ciphers in ancient Egypt and Rome: substitution ciphers of various kinds, some employing invented 
alphabets or geometrical symbols, were known from the early Middle Ages. Roger Bacon was greativ interested in secret 
writing, and much has been made {bv would-be decipherers of the Vovmch manuscript ) of Bacon s statements on this topic 
m his Epuiola de Secret! s Openhus Artu et Naturae, He recommends, for the concealment of great and potent secrets, and to 
prevent them from being abused bv the common herd of mankind, the use of the following expedients; 1 } characters and 
verses (or incantations I; 2) fables and enigmas; 3) leaving out certain letters, especially vowels (as the Hebrews. 
Chaldeans, and Arabs do to make their secrets harder to readM; 4) mixing letters of different kinds (as, for example, the 
astronomer Ethicus hid his knowledge bv a mixture of Hebrew. Greek, and Latin letters i; 5* employing letters "strange to 
one s own culture ; 6 j creating characters from one s own imagination { this last being, according to Bacon, an especially 
good method, used bv Artephius in his Book of the Secrets of Nanire\\ 71 using geometric figures combined with dots and 
signs instead of alphabetic characters: and finally 8) the "notory art." which Bacon thought was the best method of all: the 
art of writing as briefly and rapidly as one desires. Bacon claimed to have used some, at least, of these methods in his ow n 
writings 

This highly interesting and rather complete compendium of earlv cryptographic devices from the potent pen of the Doctor 
Mirabiiis has understandably inspired many students of the Vovnich manuscript to seek some or all of these techniques in its 
pages, and to see in it a result of Bacon's practice of his own recommendations. A considerable literature exists, dealing with 
ciphers attributed to Bacon in alchemical works (Hime 1904. 1914, 1915: Steele 1928a. 1928b; Manly 1931). An 
anagram, in which Bacon is supposed to have hidden a formula for gunpowder, is explicated variously bv some, but 


66 


debunked bv others fwho dismiss it as a- supers nous rale about a split willow branch that magicall* rejoins itselL or as a 
careless misreading bv an ear h editor of a sentence in a manuscript j. 

A variety of cryptographic methods are described bv other early writers, Ramon Lull (Yates I960, Rossi 1961 J. 
Trithemius 1 1564, 1606), Porta ( 1563), Agnppa 1 1970), and Athanasius Kircher (Kircher 1631- McCracken 19-*S) are 
all credited with svstetns which arc essentially forms of ciphers and codes or could be used as such, John Dec was interested in 
cryptography, and made use of it in his missions for his roval patron, Elizabeth of England, according to Deacon ( 1968* 
Many early svsrems involved substitution ciphers, using inverted or distorted characters, geometric figures, numerals, 
alchemical and astrological symbols, Latin abbreviations, etc,, in hybrid conglomerations. There were, in addition, some 
more sophisticated techniques Lists of apparently innocent words all starting with a given letter could be used as alternate 
codewords for that letter, so that an innocuous-appearing sentence consisting of five Latin words might conceal a five- letter 
word that carried the true message. Correspondents each having a copy of the code book containing the long lists of cover 
words i made-up words, names of angels and demons, stereotyped religious platitudes, etc.) could use them as an effective 
means for concealing simple messages in letters isee. for example, Trithemius 1564, pp, 48ff.l, Ramon Lull's routine 
geometric figures marked with letters could be employed to produce digraphs l Aa. Ab. Ac. . ♦. Az. fla, Bb. etcj which 
could be made to stand for words or concepts, A number of early cryptographic systems employed cipher wheels with one 
fixed and one rotating alphabet (e,g,. Alberti, m the late fifteenth century, and Silvester and Porta in the snereenrh. set 
Silvester 1526. p 7 : Porta 1563, pp ^3, 79. 83: and Meister 1902, 19061 

Ant -cher ear It cryptographic device concealed a message within a much longer "dummy” text bv some rule agreed upon 
bv the correspondents. Alchemy treatises, which were expected to be enigmatic even at best, were ideal vehicles for hiding a 
brief message in this wav A related concealment svstem employed groups of rwo or three leners in various combinations, or 
the presence or absence of some apparently decorative or accidental characteristic (small and large leners, onv dots, 
underlines, or strokes added to some letters and not to others, shading, etc.). These groups could be made to stand tor letters 
of a message bv a variety of conventions: for example, in a triliteral system described bv Trithemius (A.D. 1462-15 16 &gt; 
about 1500. a set of groups AAA, AAB, AAC ABA. ABB. ABC, . . „ CCA. CCB. CCC could provide twenrv-seven values 
for the letters of the alphabet and a few additional characters. The twenty- seven distinctions could be represented more 
abstractly bv anv three states of three things, arranged m all unique combinations (three different fonts, levels of darkness in 
printing, etc.). The famous cipher of Francis Bacon (about 1600) is of this type, differing from Trithemius svstem oniv in 
that if used groups of five 'elements, made up of two distinctions or choices, and employed more sophisticated means or 
concealing the distinctions m a cover text. 

An impressive variety of cryptographic methods, exhibiting a surprising degree of compJextiv and sophistication, were m 
use at an earlv date in the service of the Papal court and the courts of Italian Princes, A number of these svstems art 
described in Meister 11902. 1906). Pasini ( 1 87 3 K Sacco ( 1947). and Alberti 11568) Meister ( 1902) provides a detailed 
history of earlv Italian ciphers, the earliest dating to 1 226 from the Venetian Republic and others from manv Italian cities 
during the fourteenth and the fifteenth centuries. Meister (1906) traces to the year 1326 or 1327 the earliest example of a 
device called a ' nomenclator.” consisting of a small list of code words or syllables standing for words and phrases com monk 
employed in Church or State correspondence {"Pope \ '* horses'*, "soldiers' . stereotyped honorific phrases, place names, 
titles, etc,]. Meister describes a number of remarkably complex and advanced systems in use for Papal correspondence d urine 
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. These employed variant substitution elements ! manv alternative cipher elements all 
standing for the same plaintext element), often drawn from fanciful, foreign, or invented alphabets Manv such svstems also 
made use of "nulls ' U list of alternative dummy symbols having no meaning in themselves but thrown in to pad out the text, 
conceal patterns, and further confuse the would-be decipherer). All these devices could be employed in concert: a 
nomenclator." really a primitive small code, plus an elaborate svstem of monographic, di graphic, and trigraphic variants, 
with a correspondingly varied set of nulls as well. Figure 39 shows a sampling of some earlv Italian cryptographic systems 

Of particular interest because of its relatively earlv date is a system described by Jakob Silvester (1526). This svstem was 
based on a Latin dictionary; a code consisting of Roman numerals was assigned to the columns of words on each page of the 
dictionary. As an alternative, to further confuse the decipherer, a set of digraphs in random order f AF. DC. BN, etc, i could 
be used instead of, or intermixed with, the Roman numerals to designate the column. Within each column, the individual 
words, arranged in roughly alphabetical order, were indicated bv Arabic numerals. Latin endings were shown bv single 
letters or digraphs The alphabet employed is made up of invented and foreign symbols of great variety. Nulls drawn from a 
large set of choices could be scattered through the text. Figure 40 shows a sketch of the mam features of Silvester's svstem. - 
and two short samples of text enciphered in it Unfortunately, Silvester s book does not provide enough detail regarding the 


6T 


dictionary or other aspects of the srstem to support a complete invest) canon of its relationship to the phenomena i»f the 
Vovmch text, nor docs it provide anv loop samples of enciphered text that might be studied statistically. 

The reader who remembers the remarks of Tillman concerning the " beginning -middle -end " structure of words in the 
Voynich text, and the comments of Tiltman and Friedman regarding universal and synthetic languages, will recognize the 
possibilities of this earlv code system in accounting for the phenomena they had in mind I sec also Sections 5,6.5 and 6.6 
above, as well as 9.) and the Appendix below l. Friedman and Tiltman made strenuous attempts to trace the history of 
svntheuc languages back to a dace sufficient! v earlv 10 be contemporary with the Vovmch manuscript ti*e„ before I 5A0&gt; It 
is mv opinion that the earliest history of such languages can indeed be found bv searching in two areas: first, among earlv 
cryptographic systems, and second, in the medieval and Renaissance Ars Memoraeiva. Yates I 1966. p 378' mentions the 
work of Francs Bacon. Comenms. Bmerfeid. Dalgarno. and Wilkins directed toward the development of a real character 
u.e„ a svstem of signs like Chinese characters, supposed to be directly" related to their referents as are ideographs or 
hieroglyphs, and independent of the spelling or sound of words). She traces this undertaking back to a foundation in an 
ear her tradition of metnorv art. citing the work of Rosu ( I960 1, A complex cryptographic svstem such as that of Jakob 
Silvester could well form the basis of the Vovtuch text. It is interesting to note that a copy of Silvester s work in the British 
Museum Library, dated 1616. is autographed bv. and had presumably been in the possession of John Dee (Shulman I9"c 

p 2), 

9.3 Pasigraphy: Universal and Synthetic Languages 

Ac che time during the late Middle Ages and earlv Renaissance when Latin was no longer functioning as a Lingua Franca 
for learned internal communication and the vernacular languages were beginning to be employed more and more, mam 
scholars began to be concerned about finding a substitute to fill the need for a universal language Ar the same time, 
travellers, whether merchants or missionaries, were bringing news from the Far East of writing systems that appa tenth 
employed ideographs and characters that could stand for ideas as wholes, rather than representing the sounds of words 
through an alphabet. Thus there arose a number of efforts directed toward the development of a universal character or 
real character’ which would in some manner bypass the multiplicity of vernacular tongues and represent ideas di recti v in 
the same wav for all nations. 

This undertaking was not reallv a wholly new idea, in fact, it was solidlv based in the encyclopedic mnemonic systems of 
the Middle Ages Yates ( 1966» examines the work of Francis Bacon and others in the seventeenth centurv engaged m the 
search for a universal language Leibnitz, as Yates shows, was a last great exponent of the ancient tradition, weaving the Art 
of Memory into the creation of the infinitesimal calculus f Yates 1966. pp 378 ff.i. 

The earlr synthetic languages had much in common with cryptographic codes As a foundation, a classification scheme 
was set up for words or ideas to form a framework of what were called " svnearegoremata. “ The word-classes were chosen b\ 
each author according to his own philosophical bent and purposes; while intended to be independent of anv one language, 
the scheme often involved numbers or codes assigned to the words of a Liun dictionary. Some of the categories are concrete 
and straightforward, but many others seem forbiddingly abstruse and philosophical to the modern reader. In a svstem 
devised b\ an anonymous Spanish Jesuit in 1653 called an "amhmetjcus nomenclator." a class was set up for all words 
relating to the elements ; this class was assigned Roman numeral l. Arabic numerals were used to select individual words 

within the class, e.g., 1 Fire. 2. Flame, 3. Smoke 6. Wind. 7. Breeze. .... 12. Water, etc,, f see Groves 1846. p 55 

ff. i. Dalgarno s svsrem involved twenty classes of words or ideas, represented bv capital letters: A. for example, stood for the 
class "Ens. Res ; H for Spmrus, U for Homo. ' etc. ( Dalgarno. 1661 1. 

John Wilkins, inventor of a svstem of real character " around the year 1 668. set up for tv classes including such things as 
1 Transcendental. General 2. Transcendental. Mixed"; .... 5. God. the Creator"; 6 "The World. Creation , ~ 
The Elements . etc These philosophical classes embodied the concepts about the nature of the universe current in those 
rimes, and deriving from medieval foundations. Under each such class, subcategories were set up for differences and 
species Differences were shown bv vertical and oblique lines attached on the left of the basic symbol for the class, 
species bv an adjunct symbol attached on the right. Grammatical information lendings, etc. &gt; was shown bv dots or lines 
attached to the compound symbol. Wilkins svstem had a spoken as well as a written form. 

Groves 1 1846* and Kircher f 1663) provide summaries of a number of earlv svntheuc language systems. Bausani 1 19 T 0i 
ifives a verv complete treatment of synthetic languages of all types, including religious, cryptographic, and mvstical languages 
as well Dalgarno s svstem is described m Dalgarno i 166 h. Comemus m GeissJer ! 19591. Other systems are presented in 
Wilkins I 1641. 1668a, 1668b) and Top f 16031. These invented languages are of interest to students of the Vovmch 
manuscript for several reasons- First, two dedicated and expen crvptologisis who devoted vears of studv to the 


88 


manuscript — Friedman and Tilrman — arrived independently at the hypothesis that a synthetic language ot this rvpc mitnc 
underlie the Vovnich text. Second, the structure of the early universal languages \s base or root tor the class, followed b\ nnc 
or more characters to single out the species or individual word, and finally characters standing tor grammatical forms 
agrees very well with the "beginning- middle-ending struaure found bv Tillman in the words of the Vovnich text. Finally 
as we have seen in the previous section. the methods employed in some earlv codes used bv the Papal Court were hiiihh 
similar, and date to a ume sufficiently earlv to be contemporaneous with the origin of the manuscript. 

9.4 Magical and Religious Languages and Alphabets 

There remains for discussion another large group of synthetic languages which mav have a bearing on the problem ot tht 
Voynich manuscript. Tndcr this heading I have lumped together a number of different secret or mystical languages or 
various types: alchemical or philosophical svstems; languages purporting to be revealed bv. or used in communication with. 
God, angels or demons: svstems of svmbols used in magical incantahons. prayers, and spells. Bausam 1 1970 1 provides an 
excellent overview of all these made-up languages: including universal languages and the neologisms f "glowolalu" » ot 
schizophrenics and other mentally disturbed persons or persons in temporarily abnormal mental states isuch as mystical 
ecstasy or inspiration 1. Gessmann i 19 22) lists a large number of the words and svmbols empluved bv medie\u3 alchemists 
phvsiaans. and astrologers. 

94 - / Magical Languages. 

We have already taken some glimpses of magical svmbols and writing in the discussion of magical svstems m Section S i 
Most such svstems included talismans, seals, diagrams, and devices \ daggers, swords, candlesticks, ctcJ liberally decorated 
with letters in a variety of bizarre alphabets. De Givrv (197 1 ) and Seligman ( 1948) prov ide copious illustrations of maeical 
figures drawn from a wide range of sources and dates. Mans of the alphabets appear to be based on Hebrew characters in 
more or less garbled and distorted forms: Mathers (1974* pi. XV) shows several of these Hebrew writing svstems 
("Alphabet of the Magi/ Celestial Writing, ' "Malachim " or "Writing qf the Angels." and 'Passing of the River 
Some svmbob in Pkatrix are called "Indian," and mav be distortions of Devanagari or some ocher Indian writing system. 
Other Pkatnx characters are clear iv Arabic, and others still are similar to Egyptian Hieroglyphic or Hierauc characters 
Egyptian words seem discernible in some of the incantations of the Hermetic writings tFestugicre L 94-1-54 j \ for txampie, 
osergariach/' in a "true name of Hermes Tnsmegisrus" mav contain the words wjr ka re . strong is the Kj ot Re 
Pkatrix also emplovs the "star picture writing made up of circles strung on lines and curves mentioned earlier in Sections 
3.3-3 and 8.4- It is interesting to note that two of the mystical Hebrew alphabets, the Writing of the Angels and Passinc 
ot the River" also consist of small circles strung on lines m this fashion. Figure 4 1 shows some samples of magical alphabets 
from various sources. 

While interesting and suggestive, tew ot the magical svmbols discussed above seem to bear am direct resemblance to 
anything in the Vovnich script or drawings, with perhaps one exception. The Puamx "star pictures, some of the Hebrew 
alphabets, and certain alchemy symbols all are strikingly similar to the strange geometric figures decorated with faces in the 
four corners ot folio 67v2. It is also possible that the small design which Brumbaugh sees as a "dock face" mav concur n the 
character ", which is quite common in the Pkatnx spells and also in the other writing svstems mentioned above 

94.2 Alchemical * Medical, and Astrological Symbols. 

Gessmann 1 1922) presents a large collection of the svmbols and code words used bv medieval alchemists and other 
scholars and philosophers. Figure 42 shows a selection of these sufficient to indicate their general appearance and nature, anu 
includes some that appear similar to certain Vovnich script characters. It was apparent! v a common practice for alchemists to 
employ these svmbols. interspersed in Latin text, as a son of secret shorthand for alchemical products and processes. W hilt a 
few of these signs are somewhat similar to Vovnich svmbols. most of them are not, and chev offer disappointingly little help 
in our task. Of course, if a dear relationship were evident between alchemical svmbols and the Vovnich script, alchemists ac 
Rudolph s court would have had little trouble in deciphering it, and the mvsten would not have persisted tu our dav 
unsolved 

The use of pravers and incantations in medical manuscripts is interesting in that manv of the spells were in lamruagt-s 
foreign to the compilers and users of the recipes; their verv foreignness increased the potency of their supposed. effect . 
Another feature of these spells which mav be relevant to our purpose is their repetitiveness; one. two. or three words are 
often repeated several times in a row . either exactly or with minor differences, in a manner reminiscent of the repetitions in 


69 


nr* anv stretches of Vovnich text The oldest surviving Anglo-Saxon medical manuscripts exhibit numerous examples of these 
practices (see Grattan and Singer 1912, Storms 1948). Some of the spells are distortions of Old Irish pravers brought in b* 
Irish missionaries (e.g., “Gonomil orgomi) marbumil marbsai ramun. . . a spell against ' black blains. ' Grattan and 
Singer 1952. p. 64). Some are garbled bits of Greek liturgy (e.g„ Stomen cal cos. Stomen meta fotu." and 'Huiogomtn 
patera eae vo cae agion pneuma. . Grattan and Singer 1952, pp. 49-50). 

There are some interesting survivals in the Anglo-Saxon manuscripts of pagan Roman pravers. for example a beautiful 
hvmn to the Earth Mother, ' Dea Sanaa Tellus. Rerum Naturae Parens , . . (Grattan and Smger 1952. pp. 45-46 i 
Numerous relics of pre-Christian Anglo- Saxon religious rites and beliefs are discernible. Names of saints and apostles and 
snatches of Biblical texts were employed as charms. Some spells combined garbled Greek. Hebrew, and Latin words m an 
impressive -sounding conglomeration that must have had a strong psychological impact on the patient r'Ranmigan adonai 
eltheos mur O ineffabiie Omiginan. . . sother sother miserere mci deus mini deus mi Amen AJleluiah, a spell for ' louse 
bowels' . Grattan and Singer 1952, p. 189). Even the word Abracadabra.'' which has come down to modern times j$ a 
symbol for magical mum bo- jumbo, had a place in Anglo-Saxon medicine (the word "ABRACADABRA* was to be 
written repeatedly on a parchment and applied to the patient Grattan and Singer 1952. p 10). 

9 - 4-3 Mystical and Religious Languages, 

St. Hildegarde ?f Bingen i A.D. 1048-1 179). whose visions have already been examined briefly for possible parallels cu 
the Vovnich manuscript (see Section 3 2 3). was also gifted with the mvsttcal ability of * speaking m tongues. Manuscripts 
have been found preserving a series of "carmina (songs or hvmns) by Hildegarde in an ignota lingua *, she apparent!* 
sang or reared such compositions while under the sway of her mvstic visions. An invented alphabet also formed a part of 
Hildegarde s language: the letters are obviously distortions of Latin letters for the most part. Bau&amp;am (1970) provides a 
number of examples of words from Hildegarde s language, preserved in a son of glossary written down bv her 
contemporaries. In many cases, associations with German and Latin are apparent, as is the use of inflections similar to Laan 
endings. Figure 43 shows the alphabet and some samples of transliterated words. 

Bausani (1970) mentions other, similar mystical languages employed by Elizabeth von SchOnau fa contemporary o f 
Hildegarde. also m religious life, and a frequent correspondent with her), and Christiana von Trond The latter was in the 
habit of uttering melodious and incomprehensible words from ” between her chest and her throat " when in a state of 
religious ecstasy. The mystical Sufi sea within Mohammedanism also developed a highly complex synthetic language called 
Balaibalan.” provided with an extensive set of grammatical and svntanical rules and a large lexicon. Bausam £ 1970) gives 
some examples of this language. The possibility cannot be ruled out that a made-up language of this type underlies the 
Voynich script, devised by an exceptional individual under the power of religious inspiration. 

9 - 4-4 The Enochs an Language of John Dee. 

Deacon (1968) presents a dear and detailed description of the secret language which Dee and Kelley claimed to have 
received as a revelation from the angels through the ‘scrying glass." He also provides a highly interesting discussion of the 
angelic conversations'* carried out bv Dee and Kelley during the early 1580 s (Deacon 1968, pp. 138-156) Casaubon 
(1659) describes these conversations in great detail, in a work based on Dee's diaries and manuscripts, previously transcribed 
bv Elias Ash mole. The following account is drawn from these two sources. I strongly urge any interested reader to obtain 
access to Casaubon s work and read it in hill (there is a copy in the Fabyan Collection, Library of Congress). It is a fascinating 
and remarkable account, and the present brief summary can by no means do si justice. 

As we have seen above (Sections 8,4.4 and 8.9), John Dee was never able to p er c eive ihe visions in his crystal or hear the 
angels voices. For these offices he relied entirely on Kelley, who was evidently a highly unstable and unscrupulous 
personality. How much of what went on in ihe amazing seances reported in the diaries was invented by Kelley in order to 
make himself indispensible to Dee or to gain a decisive influence over him, is a matter open to question. Deacons view is that 
Dee was using Kelley rather than the other way around, and that both were engaged in cryptographic and espionage missions 
for the English Crown under cover of Dee's astrological and demonological activities. In any case, the manner in which the 
spirit communications were received and recorded seems so complex and demanding as to be almost unbelievable. Kelley 
evidently often became impatient with the effort involved, and Dee had to plead with him and importune him to get him to 
continue: one gains the impression that Kelley was never nearly as interested in the angelic communications as was Dee. and 
would much have preferred to focus his energies on the making of gold. 


70 


\ 


Dunne (he seances • mam of which took place during a visit w the court u f the Polish Count Lasks in Cracow and at 
Rudolph s court m Prague/, Kellev sat before rhe crystal and reported what he saw and heard to Dee. who wrote it down, 
occasionally putting questions to the spirits through Kellev Kellev often saw rhe angels themselves, and other persons and 
beings as well, often moving through elaborate scenes and anions as on a stage (walking along a road, climbing mountains, 
crossing streams, ere h He describes rheir faces, gestures, manner, dothing. and acn vines m remarkably vivid dctail. 
Casaubon s account provides extensive information concerning the setting, preparations, apparatus, and method of operation 
during these sessions, as well as a verbatim account of the visions rhemseives From p. 75 on, he reports the communication 
of a sei of cipher matrices or ' tables to Dee and Kellev bv the angels. Kellev saw the matrix in the crvsral with an angel 
standing nearby, pointing to its squares with a wand; Kellev then read them off to Dee. who made a copy of the matrix tor 
their own later use Mam such “tables' were transmitted bv the angels, the set called the “Book of Enoch, for example 
comprised fort v- nine tables, each having fern-nine rows and for tv -nine columns Ultimately at least twenty -six complete 
books of tables and rext were dictated to Dee and Kellev bv the spirits. 

Along with the tables, the angels dinned long lists of vocabulary words, each list followed bv a passage of running text 
that used the words, much like an everv-dav elementary language lesson During this process. Dee often asked some 
penetrating questions concerning affixes, structure, similarities he noted between words or pans of words, etc. , he also asked 
for and obtained repetitions of things he had not heard right or questioned for some reason. Casa u bon gives page after page 
recounting this a marine linguistic research, for all the world like a series cl sessions between a field linguist and his name 
informants. 

Deacon ( 1968) provides the following description of the wav running texr was dictated “Each of the cables which Kdle\ 
had in front of him consisted of a large square subdivided into forty-nine bv forty-nine small squares, each containing a letter 
ol the Enochian alphabet These letters were in apparently random order. Kellev would look mio the ervstai and see the 
angel pointing to one these small squares tn a replica of the table in the crvstal and would call our— sav 4 D .as in map 
reading) Dee would find the square in his table and write down the relevant letter. . . The result was a sentence in 
Enochian written backwards. It is almost impossible to believe that this could be faked, especially when one remembers that 
there were nifietv -eight tables to choose from for memorizing, if one was faking it." (pp 1 50- 151) In Casa u bon s account, 
individual words are clearly shown written backwards I with the Last letter first), and the order of words m each sentence or 
paragraph sem as a unit is also backwards, so that the last word sent is the first word of the passage as it is to be read Figures 
43, 44, and 45 show the alphabet and some examples of Enochian text; lit mav be noted that certain letters that appear in 
the text are not represented in the alphabet, a fact which is nowhere explained in the sources ) 

Enochian. according to Deacon, is unique and different from anv other Cabalistic language or magical system, so tt is hard 
to see how it could have been plagiarized from anv other secret writings. Robert Hooke, a prominent seventeenth -century 
scientist and a member of the Roval Society held the view that Enochian was essentially a cryptographic and espionage 
device, like a code. Deacon claims that Enochian is a bona fide language, and can be learned with some difficulty from Dee s 
unpublished manuscripts le.g.. Libn Mystertorum, Sloane ms. 3188, British Museum!, and from Casaubon s book i 165SM 
The Rosicrucian Order of the Golden Dawn ( England. L875) adopted Enochian and employed it in their ntes. The reader 
mav verify for himself in the samples shown in figures 44 and 45 that words having a constant meaning are repeated with or 
w.thom additions. ' OD‘\ and ; THIS”. "are", and ICHISGET arc nor": 'TAl'SGf AT. the earth , 
CHRISTGOS . let there be . etc. Whatever its relevance to the Vovrnch manuscript, this amazing account of research in 
field linguistics among the denizens of the spirit world deserves a careful study bv modern psycholinguists and historians 


71 


Chapter 10 

Collateral Research: Early Herbals and Materia Medica 

The historv of herbals, botany, and materia medica is a major area of study which no student of the Vovmth manuscript 
can afford to ignore. As we have seen in Sections 3 3 1 and 3-3-2 above, many researchers have made vigorous attempts w 
link the herbal and pharmaceutical drawings to those in orher medieval and Renaissance medical works, with little success. A 
number of good general works on early herbals are available to the student: Arber f 19531. Rohde !1922 i. and Sinicer 
(1927) cover the history of earlv herbals in general, with a strong emphasis on Old English herbals; Siedermann ■ l 2 
provides a large collection of beautiful illustrations of earlv botanical, magical, and medical drawings as well as j general 
treatment of these topics. Cockayne ( 1866) and Grattan (1932) cover the Anglo-Saxon herbals ver\ completely, and -dsn 
trace their history and sources. Excellent treatments of the historv of medicine mav be found in Singer i 1928, 1 c &gt;62 h Taylor 
(1922). and Thorndike (-1963L while Thorndike J 1923-38) provides extensive detail on the work of individual physicians 
among other scientists Tiltman (1968, pp. 1 1-13 1 gives a brief bur very useful sketch of the earlv history of herbals and 
botanical illustration in relation to the study of the Voynich manuscript. The following survey, drawn from these sources, 
while high I v abbreviated, mav serve to introduce the reader to the subject and its literature 

The eiriiesc beginnings of botanical drawing and description are to be found in Greece, as is true ut so much of Wester n 
learning and philosophy. Aristotle was said to have written a treatise on plants: this work was apparently Lost at a relative!* 
earlv date, and was not among the works of Greek learning preserved bv the Mohammedans and transmitted to mediewl 
scholars through them Aristorle's pupil Theophrastus of Eresus. however, produced a work which served as 4 source for the 
Greek "rhizotomiscs* ("root -diggers'*, frequently ignorant and superstitious gatherers of medicinal plants who were the 
pharmacists, physicians, and medical suppliers of their davh In the first century B.C. a highly talented and unusually 
learned member of this class of rhizotomists named Craieuas compiled an herbal containing the first known set of plant 
drawings. Crateuaj (132-63 B.C) was physician to Mithridaces VI Eupator, King of Pontus in Asia Minor. His herbal was 
illustrated with pictures apparently drawn with great care and arttstrv from life, each accompanied bv a brief description of 
the medicinal effects and uses of the plant. 

While no manuscripts of Crateuas’ work have survived, a revision or extract of it has been preserved, with some t»f the 
original drawings, in the Materia Medica Lrbri Qutnque of Dioscondcs Anazarbcus. a physician attached to the Roman 
Army in Asia during the first century A D. (Dioscorides 1939* Dioscondcs’ text and mans of the drawings were 
reproduced in a beautiful manuscript herbal presented in AD 312 to Juliana Amcia. daughter of a Roman Emperor, rhii 
manuscript, called the Juliana Amcia Codex, is preserved in Vienna, and a part of a facsimile mav be seen, according to 
Tiltman ‘1968k in the Garden Library of Dumbarton Oaks. Biedermann 119721 and Singer ( 1927. 1928) provide j 
number of illustrations of these exquisite drawings, whose lifelike and artistic quality are judged bv experts to far exceed that 
of manv. if not most, subsequent herbals well into the Middle Ages. In spite of its earlv date, the Juliana Amcia Codex ihus 
constitutes a major high point in the historv of earlv herbals. reached bv few others tor many centuries thereafter. 

The first known herbal in which plants were described tn alphabetical order was that of Pamphiluis. compiled around 
A.D 100, Manv earlv herbals also empioved an alternative arrangement dealing with plants tn an order dictated bv the boev 
part to which their medicinal effects pertained, usually starting at the head and finishing at the feet. Piinv the Eider, in his 
Saturalis Histone (A.D 771 compiled a massive enevdopedia comprising thirty -seven books covering all the natural sciences 
of the dav. This collection of magical and superstitious beliefs. Old Wives' tales, myths, and observations concerning birds, 
beasts, plants, medicines, metals, minerals, and a hosr of orher topics was greatly influential in the Middle Ages. An herbal 
based on Dioscondcs' long-lived work was compiled bv Apuleius (or ’ Pseudo -Apuleuis , as he is frequently called to 
distinguish him from the author of The Golden Ass\ about A.D. 400. This work. The Herbarium of Apuleius PUsonicus 
became one of the most widely known and copied of the earlv herbals; it survived m some form into che late Middle Acts 
and Renaissance, and was among the first illustrated printed herbals. 

Aside from the above-mentioned "" high -spots * and a few ocher influential works, there was little original research on 
plants, and almost no attempt to study or draw plant life from nature, or to make any objective, empirical trial of medicinal 
effects atter the fashion of the modern scientist. The Greek herbals and their Latin translations were copied over and over 
again, their drawings becoming more and more debased and distorted in the process. The names of the plants, and the species 
originally illustrated, were of course those of the Mediterranean region or of Asia Minor: ancient and medieval herbalists 
seem never to have realized or understood that very different plants grew in different places. The names, often drawn from 


73 


dead or moribund ancient languages, and couched in ancient forms chat were no longer understood, were caretullv copied 
along with the drawings. 

The monks in English and Continental monasteries did the best rhev could to match the garbled pictures of foreign plants 
and their exotic names against the flora of their own monastery gardens and countryside * As a result of rheir efforts, lone hsu 
of synonyms for plant names in various languages were compiled and attached to the herbals ro serve as glossaries. One 
cannot help wondering how many hapless patients lost their lives through the inevitable m i side nri fi cation of poisonous plants 
as medicinal species. Singer { 1928, p. 1 85 1 sums up the state of affairs in his discussion of the Herbarium of Apuleius: u trh 
the impatient hindsight of the modern scientist, he points to it as an instance of over a thousand vears of slavish copvinc 
applied to ‘a futile work with its unrecognizable figures and its incomprehensible vocabulary 

The Latin and vernacular herbal* of the West were thus, for the most part, simplv translations or compilations ol the 
Greek works, A Latin translation of Dioscor ides' herbal became the basis for many later medieval herbal*. The Old English 
her bah have been intensively studied by scholars, and are of particular interest because of the many primitive pagan survivals 
thev preserve, in more or less superficially Christianized form. The Leech Book of Bald (Roval 1 2D. British Museum ). is 
one of the earliest and most interesting of the Old English herbal*, dating from the tenth century, it presents many examples 
of pagan magical spells and practices. Another early herbal preserving pagan survivals is The Lacnunga, also dating from the 
tenth century (Harleian 585, British Museum). A Saxon translation of the Herbarium of Apuleius extant in manv copies, 
and another Saxor translation of a work of the Salernitan medical tradition in Italv. called Pen Drdaxeon. both dating from 
the eleventh cent ; rv, were also highlv influential among early English herbals; see Grattan and Singer I 195 2), Cockavne 
i 1866). and Storms ( 1948). and see also the brief discussion in Section 9.4.2 of pagan charms from the earliest herbals. 

Singer 1 1 928) traces the history of botanical illustration tn some detail. During the Middle Ages, a relatively small 
number of schools or traditions of plant illustration came into existence. Most of the drawings were highlv stvlized and 
diagrammatic, produced with little or no rhoughr of observing nature at first hand or even of revising details tram personal 
knowledge which must often have contradicted what the compiler saw in the sources he was copying A few notable 
exceptions provide some relief from the stereotyped rigidity of most plant drawings in medieval herbals. A Latin manuscript 
from Bury St. Edmunds in the twelfth century included some naturalistic drawings among a majority of traditional copies. 
The compiler apparently did his best to identify the ancient and garbled figures of foreign plants in his sources with the 
plants in his garden; where he succeeded, he attached the local plant name to a copied drawing. Where he could find no 
match for an English plant among the drawings, he made a new one to fill the gap. The stylization of plant draw ings reached 
an extreme in the thirteenth century, according to Singer, when thev deteriorated into geometrical forms rigidly enclosed 
within a gold frame. Albertus Magnus tA.D. 1206-1 280') included in his encyclopedic works a section called "On Plants ' 
compiled from a Pseudo -Aristotelian work, and Albertus is credited with some first-hand observation of the natural objects 
with which he dealt. 

In preparing herbal as well as other manuscripts, it was the practice of the medieval sen be or copyist to leave a space in the 
text of each paragraph for a drawing, usually of a shape and lize matching the corresponding picture in the source he was 
copying. The illuminator then supplied the pictures, if the patron or owner of the manuscript had the money to afford them. 
Singer ascribes a major advantage" (from our modern point of view) to the illuminator over the scribe, in that the former 
was relatively unlearned, and thus freer from the stifling rigidities of tradition binding the scribe to the past. For this reason. 
Singer judges the figures in some medieval herbal* to be in advance of the text in naturalism and accuracy, and sees m them a 
fresher and livelier spirit. The illuminators made some attempt to show local plants rather than copying the meaningless 
exotic originals in the ancient sources. In some cases, the holes left by the scribe were never filled (presumably because the 
owner ran out of money before he could hire the services of an illuminator): sometimes thev were filled much later with 
pictures of a different size or shape that did not fit into the spaces very well. It is interesting to contrast this common medieval 
practice, whereby a scribe left spaces to be filled later and separately bv an illuminator, with the integral composition t&gt;! 
drawings and text in the Voynich manuscript. 

After the low point reached during the thirteenth century, herbal illustration increased in naturalism and beautv 
throughout the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries tar least as fudged by the modern observer). Some late medieval herbals 
are remarkable for the life-like and artistic qualm of rheir illustrations; reproduced bv Singer 119281 are several examples in 
which insects (a dragonfly, beetles, caterpillar*, etc.) are shown sitting on the plants, all represented in a sivle almost 
indistinguishable to the casual eve from a good modern drawing. Among the better illustrations arc the beautiful woodcuts 
(made bv Hans Weidm) in Otto BrunfeLs Herbarium Vi vat Esc one j. compiled in 1530. The text, unfortunately, is far 
below the standard set bv the pictures: copied from the durable herbal of Dioscorides. it describes mediterranean plants 
completely inconsistent with the local plants tn the drawings, from the Rhine region in Germany. A widely copied work 


74 


produced in 1542 bv Leonhard Fuchs fA.D 1501-1 566* called De Histona Stirptum presents a set of relatively accurate 
plane identifications and an outstanding senes of woodcuts bv Albrecht Mever based on a study of nature The first tr uK 
modern herbal is judged by Singer to be that of William Turner in 155 1 : it is described as the first scientific work on plants 
in our modern sense. Rembert Dodocns of Holland also produced a fine herbal in 1554; the famous Her ball of John Gerard 
(1633) was based on Dodoens work, but employed for i u illustrations a magnificent set of 1300 woodcuts made in Europe 
in 1590. 

As Tiltman and other students of the Vovmch manuscript have noted, they have had little success in relating its plant 
drawings to anv of the limited traditions of plant illustration touched upon above, or indeed to anv other herbal drawing or 
manuscript. There is a very general similarity of feeling or design in some Vovmch manuscript drawings and a scatter: m: or 
pictures in this herbal or chat one. There is also a superficial similamv of stvie between some Vovmch manuscript drawings 
and some of the very debased, distorted products of successive recopving in earlv herbab (although the stviization of the 
Voynich manuscript plants mav well be deliberate rather than a result of degradation through copvmg; we have in anv case 
been notably unsuccessful in discovering any source from which such .copies might have come). There is nothing in these 
comparisons to convince anv student that he has found a counterpart or original for a Vovmch manuscript drawing m anv 
other herbal manuscript. There ts always a possibility; of course, that some manuscript or early printed work with drawings 
close! v akin to those in the Vovnkh manuscript mav yet be turned up bv some diligent researcher. The alchemical drawings 
shown in figure 36 seem, at least to my eye, considerably closer in stvie and feeling to the plant drawings of the Vovmch 
manuscript than most, if not all. of the herbal illustrations I have seen in mv own admittedly limited search for parallels It is 
mv feeling that we should certainly include alchcmv works in our investigations, ever chough they might not be expected to 
deal with plants as such, but rather as symbols for alchemical entities (the sun, moon, metals, chemicals, etc. ) 


75 


Chapter 1 1 

Concluding Remarks: Some Suggestions for Further Research 

In dosing this monograph on the Vovnich manuscript. I would like to suggest some lines along which future work on the 
problem might profitable- be directed. These suggestions include efforts aimed at gathering more data to resolve some of rht 
manv unknowns m the problem; and efforts designed to achieve a more rigorous, complete, and scientific analysis of (he data 
we now have. 

1 LI Paleographic and Other Scientific Studies of the Manuscript 

in mv opinion, it is of primary importance that the inks, pigments, and vellum of the manuscript be tested and examined 
scientifically and compared to Those of other manuscripts bv paleographers and art historians: and chat the pages of the 
manuscript be studied under special lighting and otherwise treated to bring up traces of erased, faded, or illegible writing As 
far as 1 have been able to discover, no such research has ever been carried out. Further, there are no current plans on the part 
of the present owner of the manuscript (the Seine eke Library at Yale&gt; to make anv such studies in the near tutor* 
Nevertheless, onlv studies such as these can offer anv hope of satisfactory answers to manv of our questions. Thev could turn 
up crucial new information that might completely alter the complexion of the problem I hope that some present or future 
studenr will be able to arouse interest in a scientific physical studv of the manuscript, obtain funding for it. and set the 
necessary wheels in motion to accomplish the research and make its results known to other students. If anv reader of this 
monograph knows of anv such scientific studies already carried out on the manuscript, 1 hope he will inform me ot them 

1 1.2 Uncovering More of the Manu script's History 

As we saw m Chapters 1 and 2. Wilfrid M. Vovnich succeeded in ferreting out a considerable quantity of useful and 
interesting information about the history and previous ownership of the manuscript. In his hisroncal sketch I Vovnich 1921 k 
he indicated manv promising leads for others to pursue. Everv known or suspected owner of the manuscript should be 
researched in depth; renewed attempts should be made to locate correspondence, libraries, and other collections ot papers 
pertaining to or belonging to these people, and to track down anv references to the manuscript and attempts to decipher it. 
Someone should certainly trv to locate the Villa Mondragone or other places where papers and manuscripts once stored there 
might now be preserved, in the hope of finding additional records relating to the manuscript lior example, notes made b\ 
Athanasius Kircher or bv the unknown previous owner who wrote co Kircher about the manuscript). The archives of 
Rudolph's Court at Prague should also be a promising source of correspondence or notes concermne the manuscript 
Background sleuthing of this nature is certain to provide us with at least a few new 1 nugget of information that could 
transform the problem or. at least, reduce the discouraging number of unknowns that now confront us 

1 L3 Collateral Research 

While all the most obvious sources have apparently been examined, as well as some more obscure ones, m search or 
possible parallels to the Voynich ten and drawings, it still seems worthwhile to keep up the hum among less well-known and 
less accessible sources. I believe that alchemv writings, in particular. deserve closer attention, since thev mav not have been so 
thoroughly studied bv Vovnich manuscript researchers as have herbal, medical, and astrological sources. More attention co 
earlv cryptographic writings of the fourteenth through the sixteenth centuries might also rich I v repay our efforts In fac: a 
determined, thorough, and painstaking attempt to search through manuscript collections and earlv printed books on almost 
anv of the topics iketched in Chapters 8 and 9 of this monograph could still turn up a new and illuminating bn of evidence 
for a student specifically searching for a parallel to the Vovnich manuscript It seems to me highly unlikely that the Vovnich 
manuscript scribe! j) and illuminator! s) never wrote or drew anv other work in their lives; there is always a hope of finding 
somewhere a drawing of similar stvle that might give us a due to their identity or place of origin, or another scrap ot text in 
the Vovnich script among someone s papers, 


1 1.4 A Comprehensive Machine File of the Text 

in Chapter b, we saw that several abortive attempts were made to carry our computer studies of the enure corpus 
Vovruch teat. Out of the approximately 250.000 characters of text in the manuscript, most students have studied onh small 
samples ranging from 5000 to 25.000 characters in length. Cumcr has probablv dealt with the largest machine samples of 
anv student, and his transcription alphabet appears to be the most practical choice for machine processing. U have discarded 
mv own transcription in favor of Currier's, in spite of the fact that I had alreadv placed some 19.000 characters of text on 
magnetic tape using mv own alphabet before 1 came upon detailed descriptions of his research.! Father Petersens 
concordance of the entire manuscript, made bv hand, is preserved in the Friedman Collection at the Marshall Library in 
Lexington. Virginia, where tt is not easily accessible to most students. 

It would be of great value, in mv opinion, to have a complete machine file of the corpus, in Curner s transcription, and 
including identification of "hand." ‘ language/ and the apparent subject matter f herbal, pharmaceutical, astrological, etc ■ 
as well as anv other property which students have found to be statistically significant. This file could be used as a basis lor a 
wide variety of studies, to help in forming and testing hypotheses concerning the text, and exploring further the important 
' hand' and "language phenomena discovered bv Currier as well as other matters. Smaller, carefully selected samples could 
be formed from the entire corpus for anv specific purpose. 

1 1.5 Scientific Hypothesis Formation and Testing 

Hypotheses about the nature of the text should be based on all the known phenomena, and on a careful srudv of the entire 
corpus ol text inor just one section or a few pages here and there l . The hypotheses should also take mto account and attempt 
to explain all the phenomena clearh demonstrated bv other researchers (Tillman s "beginning -middle -ending structure. 
Curner s languages" and "hands *; the repetitive patterning of ’words/’ etc.). Finally, the hypotheses should be consistent 
with, and bear some relation to. what is known of the nature, background, and history of the manuscript itself In addition. I 
think we should entertain not just one hypothesis, but a set of alternative theories that seem capable of explaining all or i 
large part of the data. Having set up such a bodv of reasonable hypotheses, we should design "experiments" based on 
samples selectively drawn from the entire corpus (all made accessible to computer processing in one format and transcription, 
as suggested above): samples such that we can attempt to confirm or discern firm each of our theories in an orderly manner 
This research will, of necessity, also involve parallel studies of text in Laun. in certain other natural languages, or m synthetic 
languages of various types 

In the absence of anv cribs, parallel texts, or other breaks into the text via external or collateral data, our onh hope of 
success lies in an orderly and cooperative scientific approach to the entire bodv of text and all the other data we have. In this 
wav, perhaps we can some dav achieve a solution whose satisfying completeness and appropriateness will do full justice to the 
elegant enigma of the Voynich manuscript. 


78 


“THE MOST MYSTERIOUS MANUSCRIPT IN THE WORLD" 

THE ROGER BACON CIPHER MANUSCRIPT 

(BACON, ROGER ?.) Cipher manuscript on vellum. Text written in a secret script, 
apparently based on Roman minuscule characters, irregularly disposed on the pages. 
102 leaves (of 116; lacks 14 leaves), including 7 double-folio folding leaves; 5 triple 
fc iio folding leaves; and one quadruple folio folding leaf. With added signature marks 
(of the XVth or XVlth century), and foliation (of the XVTth or XVIIth century) 
1-11, 15-58, 65-75, 75-90, 95-96, 99-108, 111-116. With about 400 drawings of bo- 
tanical subjects, including many of full-page size; 55 drawings of astrological or 
astronomical subjects, plus about 550 single star-figures; and 42 (biological?) draw- 
ings, most of which include human figures. The drawings colored in several shades 
of green, brown, light yellow, blue, and dark red. Large 8vo (c.250 x c. 160 mm.). Old 
limp vellum covers (now detached). From the libraries of John Dee (?), the Emperor 
Rudolph II (reigned 1576-1611); Jacobus Horcicky (Sinapius) de Tepenecz; Joannes 
Marcus Marci of Cronland (1666); Athanasius Kircher, S. J.; and Wilfrid M. Voynich. 
Accompanied by an Autograph Letter signed by Joannes Marcus, presenting the book 
to Athanasius Kircher. 

No place or date, (XVth century, or earlier?). 

An enigmatic mediaeval manuscript, which for over forty years has baffled the scholars and crypto- 
graphers who have attempted to wrest its secrets from it. It has been termed by Professor John 
M. Manly, who made a detailed study of it, “the most mysterious manuscript in the world.” 


Pig- 1. — Entry for the Voynich Manuscript from H. P. Kraus Catalog 

f Reproduced from Tilrmtft 1 968 i 


79 


1 7 ) &amp; 


St 


r gM h*j ti /rmtf &gt;r» */t m n£' 

tvtivm +&amp; 4 mi'ifim* &amp;•"*' •*' /»»&lt;■•* /ttfU-r A/. 

4 " ““6* •y’' *&lt;7*6 &lt;4fi plfc&gt; ft/yi 
4 ,-"/&lt;J tr ffiitftm ««»* 

» /(« *C4lV*4 4 *f &lt;&lt;vt 

. *1*9* *T*r. 

» ,*&lt; l&amp;tjrJSt , wtf »*■*£#£- *&lt; 

v^Uvt-vi.- *' *« ** «*/ /*«V ArV^x- Mi 

% i' t .;&lt; //»« t‘-' ■*’•'- * i r ~ f**™** — 

.r.p /},««* rtJ-WiW-.^yV' Xf-&gt;* *7 wtk/wJ 
”* ^ ^ j c &lt;U4.«»r "“*•■#" * y«* &lt; V , 

- " 44 r * *l\m4** A# f . r«A4/ J(*fr 

,4fi/ ^ frfi/**", - r &gt; I - 


, ' 


k:. 


},/j f ju«.. ^**4-^. A/«* &lt;r r 1 '**** **“ A&lt;/v - 

**(. 2 •*** ** Jw«^» ■ V* / “•'*' 7**** ^ 

||«{f 

#,/ 


4»»i* ” 


■n 

ym 


U £*s*u 


(,1/f ■#•'*■ 

* * * 

“ }*af 


r 

L 




K.fL.m.4 (JLt»« 


Fig. 2*— -Letter Found with the Manuscript 

fTiltfiun 1 %S1 


60 


REVEREND AND DISTINGUISHED SIR : 

FATHER IN CHRIST: 

This book, bequeathed to me bv in intimate friend. 1 destined for 
vQu. mv verv dear Athanasius, as soon as it came into mv poscssion. 
for J was convinced it could be read bv no one excepr yourself. 

The former owner of this book once asked vour opinion bv letter, 
copying and sending vou a pomonof the book from which he believ ed 
vou would be able to read the remainder, but he at that time refused 
to scndThe book itself. To its deciphering he devoted unflagging toil 
as is apparent from attempts of hts which I send vou herewith, and he 
relinquished hope only with his life. But his toil was in vain, for such 
Sphinxes as these obev no one but their master, Kircher Accept now 
this token, such as it is and long overdue though it be. of mv affection 
for vou. and burst through its bars, if there arc anv. with vour wonted 
success. 

Dr. Raphael, tutor in the Bohemian language to Ferdinand III. 
then King of Bohemia, told me the said book bad belonged to the 
Emperor Rudolph and that he presented the bearer who brought him 
the book 600 ducats. He believed the author was Roger Bacon, the 
Englishman. On this point 1 suspend judgement ; it is vour place ro 
define for us what'view we should take thereon, to whose favor and 
kindness I unreservedly commit mvself and remain 

At the command of vour Reverence. 

JOANNES MARCUS MARC I, 
of Cronland 


PRAGUE. 1 9th August. 16 61' 

6 " 


Fig. 3— “Translation of Letter 

fTiInruri l *&gt;66 i 


SI 


Folio No* 

Description 

Folio No. 

Description 

Ir 

text only; (1) (2) 

(74) 

l missing) 

Iv-llv 

herbal 

7V.v 

human figures 

i 12) 

(musing* 

76r 

text onlr i 1 &lt; 

13r-5“r 

herbal 

76v-84v 

human figures 

Pr 

(2) 

8 V86r 1 

text onlr 

49r 

tl&gt; 

85/86r2 

cosmological 

S7v 

cosmological; ( 1 ) 

85/86r3 

net of rosettes 

58r.v 

text onh 

85/B6r4 

net of rosettes 

p£)_64l 

( missing ' 

85/86vl 

net of rosettes 

t&gt;V*v 

herbal 

8V86v2 

net of rosettes 

Obr 

textual* . i 1 m 2 &gt; 

8*5/860 

cosmological 

btn 

herbal 

83/86v4 

cosmological 

67rLv! 

astronomical 

8^/86v5.v6 

text unh 

07r2 

astronomical 

87r.v 

herbal 

07 v2 

cosmological 

88r.v 

pharmaceutical 

68r 1 .v I 

astronomical 

89rl.vl 

pharmaceutical 

0 8r2.v2 

astronomical 

89r2.v2 

pharmaceutical 

08r3 

astronomical 

90rl.vl 

herbal 

08 v 3 

cosmological 

90r2.v2 

herbal 

0%&gt; 

cosmological 

(91-92) 

f missing J 

T 0r 1 

cosmological 

93r-96t 

herbal 

T l)v 1 

astrol Aries i dark i 

99f- 1 02v2 

pharmaceutical 

T Ur2 

astroL Pisces 

103-1 16r 

text onlv, scan 

~Lr 

astrol Aries I light i 

1 16v 

&lt;li t 2&gt; 

"tv 

astro!.. Taurus l light) 



'2rl 

astrol.: Taurus (dark) 

- 


-2vt 

astrol . Libra 



T 2r2 

astrol. Gemini 

i 1 » Kev-hke sequences 

7 2v2 

astrol . Virgo 



-2r3 

astrol Cancer 

1 2 &gt; T ext i n extra neous sen pcs 


astrol.: Leo 



-3r3 

astrol Scorpio 



■*5*3 

astro! Sagittarius 




Fig. 4.— Lilt of Folio Numbers and Apparent Subject Matter 
{Foliation of Petersen Photocopy) 


82 










f •(.# 


ioiva. 


Fig. 5,— Some Details from Herbal and Pharmaceutical Folios 

fKafrawa ftflu a phavcopf ) 


S3 




Fig* 6, —More Dttub from Herbal and Phtnutenbcti Folios 




84 



Fig, 7.— Derails from Herbal Folios 

|Mm ( « • finxufnfi I 


85 



86 



Fig. 9-— Details from Herbal and Pharmaceutical Folios 

( Redrawn from a photocopy) 


87 


rfv 






foiic 70Yl 



4«lu 73-0 



folio Hr 



4rntic 73*3 



■foUo TSv 



folio 72*- J. 



-f.l.o 72 vi 



12*2 


Fi* 10*— Some Zodiac Mtdillioai tad Mootb Niao 

i IUdri*n from ■ plWMyl 


88 




Folio 

Sign 

Month 

Rings of Figures (From Center) 

Sum 

First 

Second 

Third 

7 lr 

Aries 1 li^htJ 

April 

5 [ h 

all c 

10 il&gt; 
all c 


i* 

70vi 

Aries * dark) 

April 

5 U ] 

n and c 

10 III 
n and c 


n 

“U 

Taurus 1 light j 

Mav 

3 ill 
n and c 

10 ill 

n and c 


is 

~2r 1 

Taurus t dark &gt; 

Mjv 

3 111 

all c 

10 n' 

n&lt; hats 


is 

-It 2 

Gemini 

June 

9 i hi 

all n 

1 b r 3 ( 
4 c. rest n 

s 1 3 » 

n. hati 

30 

72r3 

Cancer 

July 

7 &lt;3) 

n. hats 

1 l f3&gt; 
n. hats 

12 i 3 ■- 

n. hats 

30 

-2y 3 

Leo 

August 

L 2 (3* 

alt n 

18 t}t 

all ti 


30 

72v2 

Virjfo 

September 

12 1 3i 

all n 

18 1 3 - 

all n 


3o 

72vl 

Libra 

October 

10 i 3 1 
n. hats 

20 i3) 

n. hats 


Ml 

"3r 

Scorpio 

November 

lo 1 3) 
air n 

16 fji 

all n 

■+ 1 3 1 

all n 

M) 

"3v 

Sagittarius 

December 

10 (31 

akin 

16 1 3) 

all n 

4 1 3i 

all n 

Ml 


Capricorn 

January 

missing 

n -= naked 
c *= clothed 


“4 r 

Aquarius 

February 

missing 

7()v2 

Pisces 

March 

10 1 2) 
n. hats 

19 iU 
n. hats 


20 

* 1 &gt; vertical cans" 1 2 » horizontal cans 

OJ no ' cans" 



Fig. 11. — Groupings of Hunan Figures in Astrological Drawings 


89 


Folio 

Elements in Rings (inside Outward) 



Central 

First 

Second 

Third 

Outermost 

VTv 

b 1 2 sets of 
4 phrases) 

4 phrases 

4 paragraphs 

68 (4 times 
17 symbols ) 

4 paragraphs 

67rl 

moon 

24 [ 1 2 double 
ravi ) 

24 ( 12 double 
ravs &gt; 



67 v l 

sun 

34 (17 double 
rays) 

12 phrases 



tw2 

6- pointed 
star 

8 words 

1 2 moons 
and phrases 

7 words 

l 2 paragraph* 
1 2 phrases 

6"v2 

sun in square 

4 eencnpe* 
tal spouts 

4 centrifu- 
gal spouts 



fo»rl 

none 

star field 
29 words 

sun at rop 
moon below 



&amp;8vl 

moon 

16(8 double 
ran) 

1 6 ( two sets 
of 8 ) 



68r2 

none 

irar field 
24 words 

moon ar top 
sun below 



6Bv2 

sun 

H (4 double 
ravii 

4 radial 
phrases 

H phrases 


6(fr5 

moon 

H (4 phrases 
4 star sets' 

4 radial 
word pairs 



69r 

6' pointed 
star 

6 letters 

45 pipes 
21 phrases 


- 

6 L A 

8- pointed 
star 

2b pi pes 
and words 




'Orl 

6- pointed 
star 

6 words 

38 cells 

9 waves 

9 radial 
words 

'Or 2 

sunl f) 

8 segments 

8 subdivi- 
sions 



tfV86r2 

sun 

4 quadrants 

4 spouts 



85/86' i 


4 tones 
from corners 

4 paragraphs 



H5/86w 

moon 

5 froth v 
rings 

4 human 
figures 




Fig. 12. — Groupings of Elements in Astronomical and Cosmological Folios 


90 


Folio 

AU 

Fignm 

Female 

Male 

Subgroupings 

75r 

14 

14 

— 

2 mbs: top. S bottom 6 

75v 

29 

29 

— 

2 tubs: top 10. bottom 19 

76v 

5 

4 

1? 

scattered 

77r 

4 

3 

u 

scattered 

77 v 

7 

7 

— 

scattered 

78r 

15 

15 

— 

2 pools: iop7. bottom 8 

78v 

9 

9 

— 

one big tub wtrh 7 "windows' 

79r 

7 

7 

— 

scattered 

79v 

4 

4 

— 1 

scattered; 5 animals also 

80r 

16 

15 

1 ? 

3 rows: 10.4.2 

80v 

12 

12 

— 

scattered 

Sir 

13 

13 

— 

2 tubs: top 7, bottom 6 

Slv 

16 

16 

— 

one big tub 

B2r 

15 

15 

— 

4 Uttered ; 11 in large pool 

1 82v 

7 

7 

— 

scattered 

83r 

5 

5 

— 

scattered 

83v 

4 

4 

— 

scattered 

84r 

33 

33 

— 

3 cubs: 12, 10. 11 

84v 

15 

15 

— 

2 cubs: top 7, bottom 8 

total 

230 

227 




Fig. 13. — Groupings of Elements in Humic Figure Folios 


91 



Stogie 

Dual 

Ternary 

Archetypical 

IOD 

I AH 

PATER 

World 


EL 

SADAI FI LI US 
SPIRITUS SANCTUS 

Intellectual 

ANIMA 

ANGELUS 

INNOCENTES 

World 

MUNDI 

ANIMA 

MARTYRES 

CONFESSORES 

Celestial 

SOL 

SOL 

MOB ILIA 

World 


LUNA 

FIXA 

COMMUNIA 

Elemental 

LAPIS 

TERRA 

SIMPUC1A 

World 

PHILOSO- 

PHORUM 

AQUA 

COMPOSITA 

DECOMPOSITA 

The Minor 

COR 

COR 

CAPUT 

World 

(Man) 


CEREBRUM 

PECTUS 

VENTER 

Infernal 

LUCIFER 

BEEMOTH 

MALEFIC1 

World 


LEVIATHAN 

APOSTATAE 

INFIDELES 


M* — Some Medieval Tables of Correspondences: Ones, Twos, Threes 

iSrtexm d — d Wr Agnpy L970 ^ IMffl 


92 



f*lia Ififr 


-f4«e 


■^»lie iol ri 








^*Uo Blr 


Fig. 1 $ — Details from Pharmaceutical and "Human Figure" Folios 


93 




Diftii 

1 3th 
century 

14th 

century 

13th 

century 

16th 

century 

Similar 

Voynich 

symbols 

l 

1 1 

\ 

l 

&gt; 

i 

2 

4 \u 

i 7 

* 

*- 

tr&gt; 

3 

Y Y 

J 

! ? 

3 

3 

■ J 

(rare) 

4 

A. &lt;(3 

a &gt; 

^ Ualvl 

AT ‘f 
K-fi 

A “4 

A 4- 

5 



&lt;i b &lt;1 

? 


6 

0- r«- 

(T «- 

a~ 

&lt;r 

r- o“ 

7 

-1 

fl 0^ 

r\ ^ 

CN A 

/\ -7 

cx 

8 

2 4 

^ d 

&lt;5 

? 2 

&amp; 

9 

9? ?* 

1 

? 

? 

? 1 

0 

o 0- ^ 

C 

| * «&gt; 

O 

O 


Fif 16 . — Comparison of Voynich Symbols and Early Arabic Numerals 

tN am nl farmi redrawn from Hill 


94 


Voynich 

symbol 

Similar Latin Abbreviation 

Voynich 

symbol 

Similar Latin Abbreviation 

r~ 

CT 

r-o 

r~n. 

7&gt; 

C* cum, con 

ft ra, ri, cri 

^ co. quo 

cxl 

r~9 cus 

fJL ^ onus ^ cor 

r&gt; 

P -ur. -tur. -cr 

r 

^ P -ter 

0 
t m/, 

L ^ ter. m-. im- | 

\fi) -um 

iA4^ -rum. —mum, -nmm 

Z 

£ cun. con, cum. quon 

^ ere, cer. car, cere 

l 

c\ 

a 

^ t- termi 

f ^ l cere 

A*, A cire 

7f 

1” qu “T 

At 

-nd. -m- 

^ -rum, -mbrus 

fj -Of, -turn, as 

7 7 

( super - 
sen pc) 

^ cer 

A cn 

} , p rae 

°,JE one 

&lt;1 

^ eius 

^ -etam, -ent 

— (u— * -nd- 

ff 

forii, folio 
(“f fiat 

Fr fr 

)“C -mbrus 

propter 

? 

^ con. cum. com 

^ Cj -us. -os. —IS* —5 


Ftg. 17. — Companion of Voynich Symbols with Latin Abbreviations 

I L*un tbfarcrutKwii taiwrc (ran CippcLh I94SM 


95 



Two Elements 

Three Elements 

Larger 

loitiil 

Symbol 

Final 

Symbol 

Compound 

Added 

Symbol 

Compound 

Compounds 


c 

rt 

c 

If, ff 

r,* 

rffr 

ftifc 

C 2 ^ 


o 

nK 

r-o 

? 

if, it 


■4P- 

d incT 
r24£ 


tr 

tt 

¥ 

r-Tf 

Hf,# 

«** 





; 

-© 

&lt;P| 


r?r 3? , 


v~ 

c 

PC 

UK 

&amp;,dfc 


a 

? 

%/ 

y 

a 

*&gt; 

V 

txros 




9 

&gt; 

7 

? 

9 

_p 

9-* 

trtfg~c 

4- 

unr 

-a 

c 

-rff # -nr 

-f 

7 

&lt;Kr ? 

If 


/ — 

_r-P 

cr 

c 

4r 

O 

7 

err 

0^ 

7 

».1t 

If 

d&gt; 

&lt;£ 

Miscellaneous Compound Forms: 

4' ^ &lt;f - 

}.l . 4 *. -%&gt;■&lt;£. S**r f 


Fig. 18,— Some Compound sod Ligatured Form) 


96 


Tiltmin 


First Study 
Group 


Second 
Stud? Group 


Kirschcr 


Currier 


Dlmpcrio 


i« ( * 

iT* 


1 

? 

S 

z 


* 

c 

L 


D 

e 

A A 

«,£ 


D 

H 

G 

8 

2 

4 
0 
A 
C 
1 

T 

5 
L 
R 
E 

DZ 

HZ 


* 

if 

rr 

? 

a 

0 

0 

rt») 

S 

4- 

* 

c 

nt 

A 

\ 

(ft 

ft 

A 

* 

space 

ptra 


P 

F 

H 

0 


A 

R 

K 

2 

0 

L 

N 

M 

8 

4 
E 
C 
T 

5 
1 

PZ 

FZ 

HZ 

DZ 

V 

Y 


+ 
o 

9 
8 
2 

if 

j? 

ff 

#* 

CT 

r* 

c 

* 

A 

U 

"X 

lit* 

7 

X* 

w? 

v) 

»0 

nO 

IWV&gt; 

IT 

ot 


space 
line end 


4 

0 

9 

8 

2 

B 

P 

V 

F 

# 

8 

% 

@ 

S 

z 

c 

A 

E 

I 

Y 

J 

U 

K 

G 

Q 

D 

N 

M 

W 

H 

L 

R 

T 


C 

J 

* 

-ff 

Jf 

tr 1 

W 

Hf' 

(Iff 

iiv&gt; 

m3 

o 

rr 

rr 

tr 

»A 

* 

in J 

iijf 

iff 

* 

; 

x* 

«« 


mr 

iii{f 

/u/f 

P 

9 

ft 

ft 

a 

eft 

pra 

stare 

line 

wan 

line 

end 

space 


4- 

s 

? 

x 

I 

e-r 

V 

V 
*IE 

* 

c : 
v 1 

x&lt; ; 
"R. : 

*/ 

'*j 

«r 

mV 

0 

u) 

vxO : 

v\\0 

% | 

* 

strf j 

wi 5 i 

«f i 

spec j 
line ■ 
end ! 

■s' 


4 
0 

5 
9 
2 
E 
R 
S 

P 

B 

F 

V 

Q 

w 

X 

V 
A 

C 

J 

G 

H 

I 

T 

V 
0 
D 
N 

M 

3 

J 

K 

L 

5 

6 
7 
/ 


para 

end 


Fig. 1 9- — Transcript ioo Alphabets of Several Researchers 


g.F £ f| * T-f- 1 J 1 ** f ^ -v.no 4 







■ f* 'f P 


&lt;rr A &lt;?x r^T (-% &lt;r^ c- 


Fig. 20. — Some Embellished sod Variant Forms of Voynich Symbols 


98 


A 

. v V”\‘ 

' xs~ 

‘A-A 


• T." ..lirti 'Ff::&gt; C y 


-i- nncyVriin c£*V,! ,.'.2 + rc+ ciY creVC*f -poyrflP 3 t 

r ( - f -.nariX r rnc .■ yc t’ W T &lt;* t- 

*• ft f ^ \ 

«v** Vfti'wcV vOrfp |o Tn*m jn: mio o 



Folio 17r (Petersen) 


Fig. 21. — Details Showing Fragments of Writing in Extraneous Scripts 


cn-(- 


99 


FoUo 

Marking 

lotcrpretadoD 

8v 


first (primus ) 

I6v 

2 9 

second 

2 4v 

y? 

third 

32v 

K? 

fourth 

40v 

T? 

fifth 

48v 

6*f 

sixth 

56v 

A m f 

seventh 

66v 

s u &gt; 

eighth 

67rl 

y *? 

* - * 

ninth 

70vl 

to"? 

tenth 

, 72y1 


eleventh f 

83r 

9 

j 

84 v 

»3 ? , 

thirteenth 

85/86v3 

I* 4 

fourteen ch 

90vl 

II 9 

fifteenth 

1 * 

— 

sixteenth 

96* 

ia’ 

seventeenth 

/ ! 

» m m 

eighteenth 

I02vl 

r9 

nineteenth 

I03r 


twentieth 


**■ 22.— Folio Gathering) 


100 


MM 


-V- ■’■ft' c£Vv' 4 .V &gt;v 




v ‘^ VV 1 '"■" e 


$ 


r --n- t-, 


"Key " Sentences. Folio ll6v (Photocopy 1 


f mtcj^iron -f-VMwrrpd. ■+• rt + ray &lt;rcvc-f- 

fur t ^arix +- mon^ j* vvc T 4«* r ^ 

a.’v bu ,# vot-cV* v(jftp (o -nim joj*mic^ q 


7&gt;ovra^ i- 


Petersen's Hand Transcript 


witch* coh olaJo. 

*“ \wilriK nontx ••• 

o^’W &amp;ccj v*)scb ubren so «i'm go. h/cJrf a. 

Brumbaugh's Reading (Brumbaugh 1975 ) 

iwubi4o* t&gt;lai«b&lt;xs mulKs 4fc ftcr cere porfxs 
4i’y ^Udrix meri* «JiC4 maria, 

•*• u a Uoi litre* s*» m*n ^af miJ\ o 

Ncwbolds First Reading (Newbold 192 $, p. 73 ] 
c 

miebi+o* olatUba J -f n%/ m Hc *S -4 -ft f-+c"cr cert -f portal *1 if"' 
S'x ^»jerix ■+ •’o('rx+ v\x + *bf * -t n ^ + ric+ + 
oCo^-t't^o^ aj»r*h So nim *,'4f&gt; o 

Newbold’s Second Reading (Newbold 1928. p, 108) 

Fig. 23.^Sonie Different Readings of Folio 116* 


101 



0 

0 

0 

o 

- ^©Tf^ercfj- 

A 

S 

A 

rf 

rf 

A 

rf 

f rt *&lt;«;•*• 

*■ noMtft.-' 

2 

* 

? 



A 

A 

A 

A 

ft C J * ** 

0 Screed# *•• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

/ 

llA-e? &lt; ••• 

rf 

rf 

rf 

rf 

/ 

*4-® rfn 

Jf A«Ty* 

f 

&amp; 

* 

rf 

$ 

f 

* 

V 

AxV^*** 

12^ 

liA 

i£a 

[&gt;v 

0— 

V 

If 

tf 

4f 

A t?*£**- 

f 

? 

? 


it 2®,0"‘ 

*= 


V* 

V5- 

l^ntj — 
^ ett jrf ••• 

&amp; 

&amp; 


J 

9 

9 

7 

nc*A ■** 

r 

c* 

&lt;r 

c* 

*•• 

A© If *** 

r 


V' 

K 



Cvdical 

Sequence, Folio 57v 


f 3 rfA*rf** 

O &lt;^e tTn y * *• 

rr •Tfrxj' - 


? 

7 

r 

9 

If 

2 

* 

o 

2 


7 

c 

J 

? 

* 


Folio 76v 


oK CoS A* *" 




A* If ft J *** 
rr e?fer ^ ** 


2- 


^•Tfc c e &lt; 
o rr *rf' 

t ■ 

octoftte-J ■* * 

^ rfc**?" 
Vet «8 o»£"- 

*ff 

© r~t ®n * ■** 

2 o ■ •• 

9 e~t oft&lt;© •** 

C otk •• ■ 

9 xj-« * 

$ effttf*'*)’-- 

y O fckD"* 

c •’* 

rf cl# A , “ 

Folio 49v 


?4t*^ 

2*jt? 

-*&gt;? 


♦ 2*A- 
? ftkOy- 
A Atfj*- 

^ t*r«*i;- 

g 

o lm#J{*** 

S ^ ^ ^ 

*ta 

A 1 »&lt;W*V" 
»&lt;* a 2- ** 
rf 

A OJl •“ 

-rf 

rf %*S- 

**! I tf~ 

Trtu&gt;fe- 

1**? 4 

^ r*«— 

t~ Tf**"*?- 

T ?W&lt;*" 
^riu»t'- 

f*uD- 

i“*7- 

«•&lt;" 


8^9 


* 


?rc^ 

**? 

If 

4*^ 


o 


u, Y 


«•*- 


Folio 66r 


Fig. 24.— "JC«y"*Like Sequence 


102 


"Ovary * Label* (Folio 78r) 

O tf cc % 2 

F H MM I N 


hm jnfunduntur 


"lmmisaintur " or ImdsaiUfinir 

"Sack" Labcb 

0 hf o S ^ Jk y o ^ J 

FESTOIN STN UTUT NTR ’Festo m(i&gt;ino 

* utuntur 

O If O. ? ^ £ 

F E S T S N "F«avi sunt" 



A 

% 

L 

cr 

V 

1 

ST 

c 

C 

C 

M 


ND 

or 

UM 

p 

D 

H 

N(UNT) 

r 

DER 

v? 

TINC 

tf 

E 

6 

OfFVBI 

V 

ER.RE.E 

frf 

UND 

■ 0 

F (BVO) 

t 

P 

If 

PER 

s 

UNDR 


G.H 

n 

R 

rr 

RUM 

* 

PERM 


H,G 

ft. 

S 

r* to 

rr rr 

HUM 


EM.ME 

! 

I 


' T 

&lt;/ 

ME 

&amp; 

MER 

■If 

NE 

t 

EX 

nJ 

-M 

u? 

-N 


ctf tc % ft % } o 

F E MM 1 N IN O 
Upper Tube Label 

S ft o 9 

] S T S N F UNDU NTR 
Lower Tube Label 

JcccSft^^ 

I M M C I S N NTR 


Fig. 25.— Feeiy'* Initial "Clews 11 anti Cipher Alphabet 

{Adapted I™ Fed, tW. p? IU4-J1I 


103 


?? 

o 

*&gt; 

L 

C 

mr 

p 

X 

A. 

0 

tk 

-7 

? 

rr 


} 

1 

2 

3 

A 

3 

6 

7 

% 

9 

A 

B 

c 

D ' 

E 

F 

G 

H 

i 

J 

K 

L 

M 

N 

0 

P 

Q 



R 


S 


T 


U 

us 

V 


W 

(X) 

X 


Y 


z 


Deciphering Mains 

f Vormch MtmboU in epprr row* rrconur ward bi tht writer from Bnunbivjrh i im I 


Pimm; 

I 

ABCDEFGHI J 

K 

L M N 0 P Q 

' Gph«r: 

12345 6789 1 

2 

3 4 5 6 7 8 


Flam: 

R STUVWXYZUS 


uO 

5 'S 1 




0 &lt; 6 &lt; ec J 

! Opher: 

2 A 6 8 1 35 799 


A R A B Y C C US 


Enciphering Alphabet 

(an 

'1. 

P E (P) P E E QfU) ? ? O Q US p 

^ « no cr ± ? 9 

P A P (E) R ^ US P A L E (V) US 


From "Key" Sequence. Folio 1 16v 
&lt;*?) » 

A P (A) (V) A Y J S VLCER 
. A A 

1 U&gt; - 

« o era Sc* i 0 

V R E (V) A PA SPA ft 


? « iTf y oi^d, if 

PACLUS PJPERHELAj GALER 


Decipher menu of Plant Labels on Folio lQOr 

* Fig 26 . — Brumbaugh’s Results 

rBmnU»i^h 1914) 

(Question marks an d letters in parentheses indicate places where there is some doubt as to interpretation 
of the characters by Brumbaugh. Vovnich characters are as seen and transcribed bv the writer 1 


104 


Roots 


Suffixes 

ott-. rffC 

- &lt;X\) 

-a^ -av\^ *&amp;\\w 

olf- , e¥- 

- ^ 

-ftN? '&lt;\w^ -aav^ 


- 

“O.VV^-lVV^ 


- ^ 


rc - 

- »£ 


? 

C-t - 

- c ? 

tc ^ cct^ 

g- 

?- 

— 

C.C^C&gt; Ct-C-%^ 


Fig 27-— TiUroan's Division of Common Words into “Roots 1 ' and "Suffixes" 

(Tilimu 1911 1 


105 


" — 

Voynich 

Symbol 

Currier 
Language A 
(Herbal) 

Currier 
Language B 
(Herbal) 

Krischer 
(fo. 103-116) 

DTmperio 

(Herbal, 

Astronom.) 



4 

290 

257 

233 


368 

0 

2249 

1373 

729 


3389 

2 

884 

1250 

406 


1333 

? 

1231 

1529 

464 


1893 

2 

205 

151 

41 


425 

X 

663 

496 

250 

(all) 

1005 

? 

531 

495 

201 

(all) 

971 

CT 

1315 

752 

376 


1373 


415 

289 

93 


557 


516 

376 

187 


734 


75 

108 

47 


154 

if 

595 

801 

267 


865 


21 

63 

6 


53 

&amp; 

165 

51 

13 


266 

£ 

42 

12 

7 


49 


86 

100 

15 


106 


7 

9 

2 


29 


900 

1085 

546 


1470 

c 

769 

1390 

730 


1094 

t 

16 

8 

2 

! L 

216 

IX 

4 

1 

0 


835 

HX 

1 

0 

0 

&lt;f 

167 

MX. 

0 

0 

0 


23 

1 r&gt; 

22 

45 

35 

IL 

689 

Hf*. 

8 

24 

11 

“t 

12 

Mr* 

3 

2 

1 

&lt;T~ 

2 

0 

38 

3 

4 


0 

tP 

82 

73 

38 


7 

up 

UtP 

455 

18 

286 

22 

153 

0 

C — 

3 

36 

If 

78 

99 

23 

7 

13 

Iff 

6 

5 

1 


tiff 

1 

1 

1 



turf 

0 

0 

0 



d 

13 

7 

1 



Jf 

5 

5 

11 





i 

td _ 2 



Totals 

11709 

11168 

4896 

18137 


Fig. 28, — Monographic Frequency Counts of Some Students 


106 


Hermetic (Festugiere 1944-54) 

Agrippa (1970) 

Hermetic (Festugiere 1944-54) 

Aldebaran 

Caput Algol 

Acharnahar 

Alchoraya 

Pleiades 

Aldebaran 

Caput Algol 

Aldeboram 

Hayok 

Alhaiot 

Hircus 

Ascherhe Aljemaniya 

Alhabor 

Canis Major 

jed Algeuze 

Algortieisa 

Canis Minor 

Rigel Algeuze 

Cor Leonis 

Cor Leonis 

Sohel 

Ala Corvi 

Cauda Ursae 

Ascherhe Asschemalija 

Alchimech Alaazel 

Ala Corvi 

Cor Leonis 

Alchimech Abrameth 

Spica 

Lion's Tail 

Benenays 

Alchameth 

Alramech 

Alfeca 

Elpheya 

Alahzel 

Cor Scorpionis 

Cor Scorpionis 

Centaur 

Vultur Cadens 

Vultur Cadens 

Vultur Cadens 

Cauda Capricorni 

Cauda Capricorn! 

Mouth of Southern Fish 


Fig. 29- — Names of Fifteen Fixed Stars 


107 



Pica (fix (Riner and Flessner 1962) 

Agrippa (1970&gt; 

1 

Al-Saratmn 

Alnath 

2 

AJ-Butain 

Allochaim 

3 

AJ-Turaija 

Athoravc 

4 

Al-Dabaran 

Aldebram 

5 

Al-Haqa 

Alchacava 

6 

Al-Han a 

Alhanna 

7 

Ai-Dira 

Aldimiach 

8 

Al-Narra 

Ainu a 

9 

Al-Txrfia) 

Alcharph 

10 

Al-Gmbha 

Algebh 

n 

Al-Zubra 

Aaobra 

12 

Al-Sarfa 

AJzarpha 

1 13 

AJ-'amwa' 

AJ Havre 

14 

Al'Simak 

Azimeth 

15 

AJ-Gafr 

Algapha 

16 

Al-Zubaru 

Azubene 

17 

Al-lklil 

Alchil 

18 

AJ-Qalb 

Alfob 

19 

Al-Saula 

Achala 

20 

Al-NaYaim 

Abnahava 

21 

A] -Baida 

Abeda 

22 

Sa d AJ-Dabih 

Sadahacha 

25 

Sa d Buu 

SabadoU 

24 

Sa d Al-Su’ud 

Chadezoad 

25 

Sa d Al-Ahbija 

Sad a la bra 

26 

- Ai-Far] Al-Muqaddam 

Ft hagai Mocadcn 

27 

Al-Farj Ai-Mo ahhar 

Aihaigalmoad 

JJ 

AJ-Risa' 

AJchalh 


Fig. 50* — Stations of the Moon 


1 


Zodiac 

Sign 

Egyp 1 

(Roman Times) 

"Hermetic 

(200- 300 BC) 

Coptic 
(400 AD) 

Aries 

1 

2 
3 

Xotu-Har 

Xont-Xre 

Si-Ket 

'fi.e*T+wr r 

XevTyC/»&lt;r 
e rt Ktr 

X°VT4/*e , 
XovTfWC 
»•*■*&lt;*• 

Taurus 

1 

2 

3 

Xau 

Arat 

Remen- Hare ■ 

frJj ou 

JS V/Htv'WS 


Gemini 

1 

2 

3 

ThowJk 

Uaret 

Phu*Hor 

O0 «p L y 

rrt rr (.**&gt;&amp; 

i t n # ' * 

v 

ou 

daCoft- 

Cancer 

1 

2 
3 

Sopdet 

Sea 

Knum 

a!if l.o~ &lt;- T 
Jty ou f •$„_ 

n*i&amp;L% 

&lt;tlT 

Xyfev/i*S 

Leo 

1 

2 

3 

Xar-Knum 

Ha-Tet 

Phu-T« 

X *•«/»* 5 
*arm 

,_*our»r 

Virgo 

1 

- 2 
3 

Tom 

Usrc-Bikoc 

Apowt 

’&lt;00 4*/ 

ppo&lt;r*tts * 

Tid/4 

olev-reptcdr 

*- o&lt;r a 

Libra 

1 

2 
3 

Sobxos 

Tra-Xom 

Xont-Hmr 

we^r/i(^s 

X *v-r^r *• 

Scorpio 

l 

2 

3 

Spi-Xnc 

Sesme 

SiSesmc 

A4&lt;r 

eWr^-5 

. rtr &gt;* , 

Sagittarius 

1 / 

2 

3 

Hrt-Ua 
Sesme 
Korn me 

&lt;r^V«5 

T«w^h*5 

X 6t'&lt;r£.p 

^Aout^ 

rtc/us 

KO/V4* 

Capricorn 

1 

2 
3 

Smat 
Srat 
St -Seat 

Tii?f 

5 '/ 

fc rr t re* 
£tri*tv"3 

•vUr 

#~|*40 

J &lt; 

Aquarius 

1 

2 
3 

Tra-Xu 

Xu 

Tra-Biu 

j / 

co-tf 

c- o &lt;r “ 

^oyoi&gt;/H»0s 

rrn*i/ r 

„ 

rrTLft 10 ^ 

Pisces 

l 

1 2 
! 3 

L ■ 

Biu 

Xont-Har 

Tpi-Biu 

t*tvw 

j— U/* «*J 

f*Coa , 

y^ov T*f£ 
rr-nflido 


fig . 31&lt;— Names of ibe Thiny-Six Deem ns 

IGundet I9&gt;6.pp 77ff I 


109 


i 




u 

ft 

t 

C 

L 

Ft 

ft 


1 

£ 

1 

M 

1 

A 

1 

£ 

1 


A 

r* 

u 

Q 

1 

A 

u 


A ch»rm id cause any 
spirit to appear in the 
form of a serpent 


2ft 

\ 

2.4 

3 

l 

2. O 


24 

M 

\* 

2&lt;* 


a 


o 



Square for use during 
angelic invocation 


A/ 

&amp; 

&amp; 

0 

T 

£ 

(Z- 

A 

S 

o 

6- 

A 

A. 

A 

&lt;? 

0 

5 

A 

A 

£ 

r 

© 

£ 

£ 

fJ 


A Chaim for divers 
virions 


Three Magic Squares from Abrnnelin 

(Mk ten 1971 ) 


I 




Fig, 32. — Some Magical Scab and Talismans 


110 


Some of John Dee's Angel Names (Deacon 196#) 

Spirits of the Hours 
{Agrippa 1970) 

Aethyrc 

Governors 

Seven 

Great An cels 

0*7 

Night 

L. Lil 

Occodon 

Pascomb 

Valgars 

Sabathiei 

Madinuel 

SemeLiel 

Nogahel 

Corabiei 

Lavanael 

Zedekid 

(Governors 
of the 

"watch rowers" 
or seven 
circles of 
heaven} 

Yajrn 

ianof 

Nafrua 

Sales 

Sadedali 

Thamor 

Ourer 

Tamic 

Neron 

layon 

Abai 

Natalcm 

Bcron 

Btrol 

Thami 

Athir 

Math on 

Rani 

Netos 

Tafrac 

Saffur 

Agio 

Caierva 

SaLam 

2. Ain 

Doagnii 

Piscaina 

Diaiiva 

3. Zorn 

(etc.) 

&lt;30 in all) 

Samapha 
Virooli 
And n pc 

(etc.) 
(90 in all) 

Names of Planetary Spirits 

Abramelio (Mothers 1973) 


de Giary 

(1971J 

Pica true 

(Ritter* Pleas oer 
1962) 

4 Superior 
Spirits 

8Sub- 

Pnncej 

Saturn 


Anrron 


Ashtl 

Lucifer 

As ur oth 

Juptrcr 


Beth or 


Rufija'ii 

Leviathan 

Magoth 

Man 


Phaleg 


Rubijail 

Cata a 

Asmodeus 

Sun 


Och 


Bail 

oilll 1 

Beelzebud 

Venus 


Hagith 


Bin il 

BdiaJ 

Onem 

Mercury 


Ophtel 


Harqil 


Paimon 

Moon 


Phuel 


Saljall 


Ariton 







Amaymon 


Fig. 33. — Some Demon and Angel Names 


111 


Fig. M'— Elements of Gileaic Medicine 


Humor) 

Element) 

Qualities 

Condition) 

Tempera* 

menu 

Colors 

Seatons 

Agei 

Winds 

Zodiac 

Signs 

Blood 

Air 

Hot-Moist 

Liquid 

Sanguine 

Bed 

Spring 

Childhood 

S 

Ariet 

Taurus 

Gemini 

Yellow Bilt 

Fire 

Hot-Drjr 

Gaseous 

Choleric 

Yellow 

Summer 

Youth 

E 

Cancer 

Leo 

Virgo 

Rlaclt Bilt 

Earth 

Cold- Dry 

Den it 

Melancholic 

BUck 

Autumn 

Maturity 

N 

Libra 

Scorpio 

Sagittarius 

Phlegm 

Wsier 

Cold 'Moist 

Solid 

Phlegmatic 

White 

Winter 

Old Age 

W 

Capricorn 

Aquarius 

Pisces 


Sephiroth 

Attributes of God 

Spheres 

K ether 

Hokhmah 

Binah 

Hood 

Gevurah 

Rahimin 

Netseh 

Hod 

Yood 

Malkuth 

The Supreme 

Wisdom 

Intelligence 

Love, Mercy 

Power, Writh 

Compassion 

Eternity 

Majesty 

Basis 

Kingdom. Glory 

Pnmum Mobile 

Ogdoad (Fixed Scars! 

Saturn 

Jupiter 

Mars 

Sol 

Venus 

Mercury 

Luna 

Elements 


Fig. 3 5 . — Some Elements of Cabala 


113 





Fig. 36. — Two Alchemical Drawings 


114 




Fig- 37 .“Some Costume Elements in Voynich Manuscript Drawings 


115 


cl f ? or f z Lx 

n 3 Z ? 

&lt;r / s 3 S 5 7 T 2 T va &gt; 



Notana Aristotelis, England, Thirteenth Century 


LMh*vi p M&gt; 





1 1 

r i r 

i r i r ? 1 

*t f 1 

i r tt r 


a b 

c d e 

f g h i k m 

n o 

p r s i u 



k 

i 


z v 




y 


w 




Base Characters 





J L 

J V J L J 

t &lt;i b 

.4 U 



Twelve Auxiliary Marks Added to (he Foot of Base Svmbol "A H * 

! 

| 

: J 

abound 

about 

rT 

forget (remember + F) 

1 




(antonym) 

j 

d 

| 

also 

— ^ appenaine 

•2 

abandon f A+ forsake) 

1 


— ^ 

anger 

(synonym) 


- 

‘'Character a 11 Words * 


Other Words 




Thomas Bright's Charaaerie 

iDuthir 14701 


: A 

n “7 

C L J +■ 

&gt; 

/ 

0 

u 


a 

b d 

e f g h 

* i* 

k.e.q I m n 


( 

/ w 

— /&lt;=.— 

V ) 

&gt;» Y z. X 


* o 

j 

p q(u) 

r s c u 

V w 

X v z Ch 


] .n 

*n 

n &lt;v 0« 

b 



ba 

l 

be 

bi bo bu 

sh 



^ A 

^ ^ progressive 


abound 


i -• 

rebellion 


res pea 



words m hill 

abbreviated words 




John Willis' Stenographic 


r 

i 



f Dithtr 14701 


1 

~-4- 


Fig. 58.— Early Shorthand Systems 


116 


R S T U X Y 


ABCDEFGHJKLMN OPQ 

e i/T4z*i-£‘-r / /? + %X 3 *■ 


Nomendator; 




PAPA 

°T 

VENETI 

We 

CARDINALIS 

Q 

3P 

MONACHUS 

an 

REX FRANCIE 

Is 

ANTONIUS PONT IS 

p ro 

MON5 PESULANUS 

«3 

FLORENTINI 

P e 


e+c. 


A Cipher of Parma, 1379 iMnn iwe.p itm 


A B C D E F G 

1 7 7 V i * 

© ^ 

*: 1- 


H I L M N 0 P Q 

3 J. &gt;0 4 4 ? C* 

X TT -A- 
T 


R S T U 
^ H 3 u 

f H 
X 


con 


r 


Null*: "F C.D If ip C# /"(? m 0 ^2p @ p °f* « R 

Sample of 1 

Cipher text ... 

p t o v i d e aturperdompa p a m d c p a cri... 
A Venetian Cipher. 1411^ fs*m&gt; iw. p, » 

b”c D E F G H I L M N O P O R S T uT7 

r ^ P!1»»3 7 &gt; 

=» V + 

* J 


quo 


A 
? 

-«- n + 


PQ RS I UAJ 17 

- , , , + 7T^rt! 


4 7 * « 


T 9 

r y 


Nulls: 

■5K* Q 33 44 T TTT 


Doubled: 


Syllables: 


°3 

BB 


&gt;= + 

CC 


DD 


FF 


b3 

GG 


43 

LL 


NN 


"3 7 3 ^3 

RR SS TT 


— B « Xf) Ff 4-0 ° 

QUA QUE QUI QUO_ QUU 

(Thu system also included a "nomenelitor' . or set of code words) 


Code of Urbtno. 1440 (One of 72 similar codes) rsucro iw7, P 6 \ 


JL 


Fig 39- — Some Early Italian Cryptographic Systems 


117 


Word 
Desif - 

Word Matrix or Chan: Column Di 

aiguators 

tutor 

1, BD 

11, AF 

111. DL | 

| HI!. CL 

V. AC 

VI. BA 

j 

AUDIO 

BONUM 

CEDO 

D1LIG0 

EXPELLO 

FALLO 

&gt;1 

AMO 

BELLUM 

CONFERO 

DORMIO 

EXPUCO 

FALSUM 

m 

ASPIC10 

BENEF1CIO 

CONCLUD 

DONO 

EXTOLLO 

FALLACIO 

m\ 

AGNOSCO 

BIS 

COMMENDO COCEO 

EXIMO 

FRAUS 

V 

ALEXANDER 

. BESTIA 

CONS1GNO 

DOCTRINA 

EMO 

FORSAN 

vi 

AMOR 

BELLIGERO 

CONDEMNO DOLUS 

EMULO 

FORIS 


APPETO 

BACULUS 

COMMODO 

DOLOR 

EQUUS 

FORAMINA 

etc. 

etc 

etc. 

etc. 

etc. 

etc. 

etc. 


Ending Codes 
Nouns: 


Cue And N umber Gender 

Singular Plural 

Nominee A G Masculine 

Genitive B H Feminine 

Dative C I I Neuttr 

Accusative D K 

Vocative E L 

Abiadve F M 


BB 

CC 

DD 


Verbs: 


Mood 


Indicative 

Passive 

Imperative/ Optative 
Subjunctive 

Infinitive 


N 

O 

P 

Q 

E 


Tense 


Present 

Imp er fec t 

Perfect 

Pluperfect 

Future 


S 

T 

V 

X 


Person 


1 

2sg 

5*&amp; 

1 pi 

2 pi. 

3 pl 


Y 

B, P 

Be 

V Y 

60, 33 


Sample* of Coded Text: 

F &amp; . C • Bnvg , £i* 

Pondfcx l e ro pe? amavit ju to turn. 

fit. I . t&gt;L - *** 0A- n-»*7j * CL- ^ty*. AP. xv.k*^ 

Bona cotuiiia faciunt domino* beato* 


Fig. 40. — Jakob SiKeiier’i Code 
(so™- n». Mjo 2 H-M) 


118 


SYMIes* 


"Indian” characters to make 
Saturn grant a wish. 


iKFrixtrtvFrfZFtn-F *■ 'XT%tuY 
J l« "b 1 1 &lt;¥&gt;S 1 1 v|vtv|v|vl/nil( 

"Efypcian" characters "from Geopatra", to protect one from a king. 




A charm to chase away mice. 


JC AVkX-WsW 


Charm to bring 
a lover. 


'C } 

LJ*&gt; ' 


An "Egyptian” prayer to Venus. 


&lt;• 1 ZLi + 'rJc? tt f" X y 


Charm to chase 
away wolves. 


Some Charms from Picatrii (tm »d 


19621 


X/SCtT# 2THS/A 3-EK 

ANARH£TA PIA fOTc&gt;R t&gt;Rio/V 5ARA&amp; 
2AM0A/1 • AL/^RHi ■ OHoDoS* SCItS 

Some Spells from the Keys of Solomon idcCi*™ 1971. P toai 


TA AULA. Ta ALLA o/V AHJD *VOfft£L 
5UA ALLR TMUQotJ j ft ^Luoti 

OU tf-tU-ftTi/V VAHH£-AUA/ 

AOA STApfldU ALlft SuU^flTl 

aua KAHlR 

Charm from i Seventeenth Century "Gritnotrc de la Cabale" in the Bibliothequc 
de I * Arsenal , \ &amp; Gnnr, 1 97 1, p. 11 2 ) 


Fig. 4L— Some Magical Spells sod Invocations 


119 


4 4 

Jupiter Tin 

e 

Alum 

8 

White Arsenic; 
Copper Plate 

e 1 

Soapstone 

Red Ats«ik: 
Mercury; Vitriol 

White Arsenic 

i v 

Potash 

Quicklime 

I 

Burned 

Copper 

To Distill 

' 

Orpimeru 

Urine 

II 

f 

LCfullU 

Month 

H* 

Bismuth 

o 

Oleum Tartan 
Sennerti 

*, *? 

Sail 

if 

To Prepare 


Fig. 42 . — Some Alchemy Symbols 

fGiwwii 1«Z1 


120 




r B 2 

a b c 

B 9 

d e 

r 3 

? * 
h i 

j~ i 

k 1 

3fi 9 

m n 

S S 1 


r « 

L S ^ 

*?&gt; W 

w* 

o p q 

r i 

t u 

X * 

2 et 

est 

Aigoux — God 
Di vciiz — Devil 
lminots — Man 
I spam z — Spirit 

Viniz — Woman 
Luzeica — Light 
Ciizia — Church 

Gnuimbuz — Cherry Tree 
Muximbuz — Nut Tree 
Arreien * — Arch bi sh op 
pholianz 

St Hildegarde's Alphabet and lgnou Lingua 

rMmctr L902.E.LOMH1 19701 



&gt;&gt; V 3 

13 

I 

1 

* 

\j&gt; 

a b 

c 

d 

e 

f 

% 

09 1 

&lt; 

a 

3- 

X* 

n 

h i 

i 

m 

n 

0 

P 

ir a 

"L 

j 

a 

r 

? 

q T 

S 

t 

u 

X 

z 

John Dee s Enoehtan Alphabet • ( 

Dam 1968] 




Fig. 43.^-Two Mystical Religious Languages 


121 


M1CMA 

Behold. 

GOHO 

Faith 

P1AD 

your God 

2IR 

1 am; 

COMSELH 

« circle 

AZIEN 

on whose hands 

BIAfi 

are 

OS LON DOH 

12 kingdoms 

N0R2 

six 

CH1S 

are 

OTHIL 

the icau 

GI GI PAH 

of living breath; 

IJNDL 

the rest 

CHIS 

are 

TA PU IN 

as sharp sickles. 

Q MOS P1_FH 

or the horns 

TELOCH 

of death ; 

QUIIN 

wherein 

TOLTORG 

creatures of the earth 

CHIS 

art. 

I CHIS GE 

to are not (sic) 

(E)M 

except 

OZIEN 

mine own (hand) 

DST 

which 

BURGDA 

sleep 

OD 

and 

TORZUL 

shall rise. 

IU 

In the first 

EOL 

] made you 

BALZARG 

stewards 

OD 

and 

HAALA 

placed you 

THILN OS 

in seats 1 2 

NETAAB 

of government: 

DLUGA 

giving 

VOMZARG 

unto any one of you 

LONSA 

power 

CAPMIALJ 

success; veiy, 

VORS 

over 

CLA 

456 


HOMIL 

the true ages 

COCASB 

of ome; 

FAFEN 

to the intent that, 

IZIZOP 

from the highest vessels 

OD 

and 

Ml IN O AG 

the corners 

DE 

of your governments. 

GNETAAB 

you might work 

VAUN 

my power. 

NANAEEL 

pouring down 

PANPIR 

the fires of life 

MALPIRGI 

continuously 

CAUSG 

on the earth 

PILD 

Thus 

NOAN 

you are become 

UNALAH 

the skirts 

BALT 

of justice 

OD VOOAN 

and truth. 

DO 01 AP 

In the name 

MAD 

of the same, your God 

GOHOLOR 

lift up, 

GOHUS 

Isay. 

AMIRAN 

yourselves 

MICMA 

Behold 

JEHUSOZ 

His mercies 

CACACOM 

flourish 

OD DOOAIN 

and name 

NOAR 

is become 

MICAOLZ 

mighty 

AAIOM 

amongst us; 

CASARMG 

in whom 

GOHIA 

we say 

ZODACAR 

move. 

UNIGLAG 

descend 

OD 

and 

IM UA MAR 

apply yourselves unto me 

PUGO 

as unto 

PLAPL1 

the partaken 

ANANAEL 

of his secret wudotn 

QAAN 

in your creation 


Fig. 44 — A Sample of Enocbiio Text 

[Cuuba !«*.*. *4) 


122 


YARRY 

To the providence 

LNIBM 

One season 

ID OIGO 

of him that sitteth 

OUCHO 

lei it confound 


on the HoW Throne 

SYMP 

another 

OD 

an d 

OD 

and 

TORZULP 

rose up 

CHRISTGOS 

let there be 

1AODAF 

in the beginning 

AGTOLTORN 

no creature 

GOHOL 

saying 

MIRC 

upon. 

CAUSGA 

the earth. 

Q 

or 

TABAORD 

let her be governed 

TIOBL 

within her 

SAANIR 

by her parts; 

L£L 

the same. 

OD 

and 

TON 

All 

CHRISTGOS 

let there be 

PAOMBD 

her members 

YRPOIL 

division 

DILZMO 

let them differ 

TIOBL 

in her 

ASPIAN 

in their qua lines 

BUSDIRTILB 

that the glory of 

OD 

and 


her 

CHRISTGOS 

let there be 

NOALN 

may be 

AGLTOLTORN 

no one creature 

PAID 

always 

PARACH 

equal 

ORSBA 

drunken 

A SYMP 

with another. 

OD * • 

and 

CORDZIZ 

The reasonable crea - 

DODRMNI 

vexed 


cure of the earth. 

ZYLNA 

in itself. 


or man. 

BL ZAP TILB 

Her course 

DODPAL 

let them vex 

PARM GI 

let it run 

OD FIFALZ 

and weed out 

PIRIP SAX 

with the Heavens. 

LS MNAD 

. one another 

OD 

and 



TA 

as 



QURJST 

an handmaid 



BOOAPIS 

let her serve them. 




Fig. 45. — Another Sample of Enoch ian Text 

fCmuhon 1619. p 203 1 

(The * teener of V uvd J train the alphabet of fig 4 3 u tux explained ] 


123 


Bibliography 


[f[ has been suggested to mt bv a udkaguc that 1 should add a note to this bibliography tdling where the hot!k&gt; nu*\ K 
found. Most of the books mav be obtained either from the Librarv of Congress i including the Rare Book Room'. Widener 
Library at Harvard I'niversjtv. or the Main Librarv at Catholic University. Some are recent reprints which I saw in the Yes 
Bookstore in Washington. D,C The purpose of this bibliography is to make the literature as accessible as possible to am 
serums student of the Voviueh manuscript; hence 1 have provided information on currently available reprints and fac- 
simile editions of some older works. Personal communications and other unpublished materials are preserved in a collection 
of Vovmchiana, and mav be examined bv arrangement with me.J 
Agnppa, Henrv Cornelius. 19^0. Opera. London: f 1531. i Reprinted 19^0. &lt; 

Acrippu Henrv Cornelius. 1651, Three Books of Occult Philosophy. Translated bv I, French London. 

Aguirre v Respaldi/a. Andres. 1 l )^. Rogertor Bacon. Barcelona -Buenos Aires: Editorial Labor s. a 
Alberti. Leon Battista l 568 Opuscolt Morals Edited bv C Bertolli. Venezia, 

Alessio. F, 1957. Mi to e Scteriza in Ruggero Bacon*. Milan; Ceschma. 

Alessio. F. 1959, Un Secolodi Studi su Ruggero Bacune i 1848-1957 Revista Crittca Ji Start# Jell# Ftlomfta 1 4 
Allen, Don Cameron. 1941, The Star-Crossed Renaissance The Quarrel About Astrology and Its Influence m England. 
Durham, Nt*nh Carolina: Duke University Press 

Allen, Thomas William 1889 Sotes on Abbreviations in Creek Manuscripts. Oxford: Clarendon 
Alston. R (. 19 &gt;0 Treatises on Short /sand. Leeds: Printed for the author bv E J. Arnold. 

Ah ick. Richard D 1950, The Scholar Adventurers. New York; Macmillan. 

Arber. Agnes, 1953. Herbals. Their Origin and Evolution. 1 4^0~1 h^O. Cambridge: The University Press. 

Ash brook . Joseph. 1966. Roger Bacon and the Vovnich Manuscript/ Sky and Telescope t April i. pp. 218-219. 

Ashmole. Elias. 1652. Theatrum Chemicum Bntanmcum . London: Nath. Brooke. ( Reprinted Hildesheim 1969 &gt; 

Askham. Anthonv. 1548a. An Almanack* a Prognosticacyon . London : W. Powell. 

Askham Anthonv. 1548b. A Pronosttcacton Made for the Y ere MOXLVtlh London: W, Powell. 

Askham, Anthonv. 1550, A Little Herhatl of the Properties of Herhes. London: W Powell. 

Askham, Anthonv, M 552, A Lytel Treatyse of Astronomy. London: W, Powell. 

Askham. Anthonv 1553- A Prognostication for the Yere MCCCCLlll. London: W. Powell 
Atwood. Marv Anne. 1969 Hermetic Philosophy and Alchemy. New York: Julian Press. 

Bacon. Roger. 1659. De Mirahtli Pot estate Arm et Naturae* or Friar Bacon His Discovery of the Miracles of Hr;. Suture 
and Magick. London. 

Bacon. Roger. 1603. Sanrons Medtctnae Magntri Rogeri D. Baconts Angli Je Arte Chymiae Scrtpta, Frankfort 
Bacon. Roger. 1683. The Cure of Old Age. and Preservation of Youth. Translated bv Richard Brow ne. London Printed 
for Thu. Flesher and Edward Eveis 

Bacon. Roger. 1859. Fr. Roger t Bacon Opera Quaedam Hactenus Inedita. Edited bv John S. Brewer. London Green. 
Longman and Roberts. 

Bacon. Roger. 1 89.3, Lettre sur les prodiges de la nature et de Part. Translated and commented bv A Pmsson. Pans 
Chamuel. 

Bacon. Roger, i 1 897- 1 900 L The Opus Majus' of Roger Bacon . Edited bv John H Bridges. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
i Reprinted Frankfurt/Mam: Minerva-Veriag. 1964 9 

Bacon, Roger. 1902. The Creek Grammar of Roger Bacon and a Fragment of His Hebrew Grammar. Edited bv Edmund 
Nolan and $ A. Hirsch. Cambridge: The University Press. 

Bacon. Roger. 1909. Un fragment tnedtt de fopus terimm de Roger Bacon. With preface bv Pierre Du hem. Quaracchi: 
St Bona venture College Press. * 

Bacon, Roger. 1909-1940. Optra Hactenus Inedita. Edited bv Robert B. Steele. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 

Bacon. Roger, 1911 Compendium Studii Theologtae. Edited bv A. G. Little. Aberdeen: University Press, i Reprinted 

I960.) 

Bacon. Roger. 1912. Pan of the Opus Teritum of Roger Bacon. Edited bv AG. Little. Aberdeen: University Press. 

Bacon. Roger 1923- Roger Bacon 's Letter Concerning the Marvelous Power of Art and of Nature. Translated bv Tenntv 
L. Davis Easton. Pa The Chemical Publishing Co. 

Bacon. Roger. 1928a, Fratns Rogers Bacon De Retardation* Acctdenttum Senectutis. Edited bv A G Little, with preface 
bv E Wifhmgcon, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Bacon. Roger. 1928b. The Opus Maras of Roger Bacon Translated bv Robert B. Burke. Philadelphia University of 
Pennsylvania Press ( Reprinted New York: Russell &amp; Russell. 1962. f 

124 


B-itumker. Clemtns 1 9 1 6 . Roger Bum m Sat it rphihsophie. Munster 1 . VK ' 

Balts, Peter, 159T The Arte of Brachygraphte London Imprinted b\ G Shawe and R Blower, tor T ( harder Re- 
printed New York: DaCapu Press, 19?2 j 

Bardon* Franz. 1962. Initiation info Hermettcs . Translated be A, Radspjcier Kettig liber Koblenz: Osins- Verlai:. 

Bardon. Franz. 1975 The Practice of Magical Evocation. Wuppertal: Victor Ruggeberg. 

Bauer, H, 196J. Die wunderbare M'dnch: Leben und Kampf Roger Bacons . Leipzig: Koehler &amp; AmeLing. 

Bausani. Alessandro, 1970. Geheim und Universalsprachen , Stuttgart. 

Beck. Cave, 1657. The Universal Character. London: Primed bv Tho, Maxev. lor William Weekiev. 

Benoni. Efrem. 1962a. "Ruggero Bacone in Alcune Recenti Pubbltcazione Italiane," Revista di Fi/o &lt;ofia Se**.&lt;e**L* stica 
54, p. 3- 

Becroni. Efrem. 1962b. San Bonaventura e Ruggero Bacone. " StuJi Francescani 59. p I 2. 

Bet tom, Efrem. 1960. L Anstoteiismo di Ruggero Bacone/ Revista di F'tlosofia Seoscolasttca 5h. p 5 

Bertoni. Efrem, 1967. La Dotrrma della Conscienza di Ruggero Bacone.” Revista di Filosofia Seoscolasttca 59. p. \ 

Btedtrmann, Hans. 1972. Medicina Magica, Me tap by sue be Heilmethoden in spatamiken und mittela l ter lichen Hand- 
le hrtf ten. Graz: Akadem. Druck-Verlaganst. 

Bigalli, Da vide. 1971. / Tartan e t'Apocatissi . Ricerce suit Escatologia m Ada mo Marsh e Ruggero Bacone Firtn/c La 
Nuova Italia. 

Bird. Malcolm. 1921. 'The Roger Bacon Manuscript: Investigation inn? its Historv. and the Efforts to Decipher It 
Sue* 'rific American Monthly } ijunek pp. 492-496. 

Bishop. William Warner. 1950. A Checklist of American (^opies of "Short -Title Catalogue ' Books 2nd td Ann Arbor 
1/nivcnitv of Michigan Press. 

Blau, Joseph Leon. 1944, The Christian Interpretation of the Cabala in the Renaissance, New York: Columbia Inner' 
sitv Press. 

Blish. James. 1971. Doctor Mtrahtlis: A Novel. New York: Dodd, Mead. 

Bober, H. 1948 "The Zodiacal Miniature of the Tries Riches Heures of the Dukeof Berrv/* Journal of the Warburg and 
Courtau Id Institutes 11. pp. 1-34. 

Boge. Herbert, 197}. Gnechischt Tac hy graphic und Tironisc he Noten . Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. 

Boll, Franz and Btzold. Carl, 1 9} I, Stemglauhe und Sterndeutung: Die Geschichte und das Wesen Jer Astrotogie ith 
ed. Leipzig: B G Teubner. 

Bolton. Hcnrv C. 1904, The Follies of Science at the Court of Rudolph //, M 7 6-/6/2. Milwaukee: Pharmaceumal 
Review Publishing Co. 

Bouvgcs, M. 19}0 Roger Bacon a-t-il lu les livres Arabes.'" Archives d' histone doemnate et imeraire du moyen age 5. 
pp- 311*315 

Bregola. G, 193"/ ’ll Valore delle Lingue c dellc Scienze nell' Apologetica di Ruggero Bacone.” La Scuola Car folic ah 5. 
pp 372-391. 

Bridges. John Henrv. 1914, Life and Work of Roger Bacon . Oxford: Clarendon Pfcss. 

Brophv. Liam. 1963 The Marvelous Doctor , Friar Roger Bacon. Chicago: Franciscan Press. 

Brumbaugh. Robert S. 1974, "Botany and the Vovnich Roper Bacon MS Once More. Speculum 49. pp. 546-548, 

Brumbaugh, Robert S. 1975. The Solution of the Vovnich Roger Bacon Cipher Yale University Library Gazette 49 
i April / pp. 347-355. 

Brumbaugh, Robert S. 1976. "The Vovnich Roger Bacon Cipher Manuscript: Deciphered Maps of Stars/ ' Journal of 
the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes XXXIX 1 1976k pp, 139-150. 

Bruno. Giordano. 1582. Dt Umbrts Idearum. Pans. 

Brusadclh. M 1954. Ruggero Bacone nella Scoria." Re vista di Filosofta Neoscolasttca 6. 

Burbnd. Cottie A 1967, The Arts of the Alchemists, London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson. 

Butler, Eliza M. 1948. The Myth of the Magus. Cambridge: University Press, 

Butler. Eliza M, 1949, Ritual Magic . i Reprinted bv Newcastle Publishing Co.. Inc., 1971 . &gt; 

Candler. Howard. 1907. "Roger Bacon and Francis Bacon: A Comparison. In Royal Society of Literature of the United 
Kingdom , Essays by Oners Hands . Being the Transactions. 2nd Series 27. pp. 171-195, 

Oppelli, Adriano. 1949, Lexicon Ahbreviaturarum. Milan: Ulrico Hoepli. 

Carter, Albert H. 1946. "Some Impressions of the Vovnich Manuscript." Unpublished notes. It) September 1946. 

Carton. Raoul. 1924a. "L "experience phvsique chez Roger Bacon," Etudes de philosophic medieval e 2, Paris: J. Vrin, 

Carton. Raoul 1924b. L experience mystique de 1' illumination inteneure chez Roger Bacon." Etudes de philosophte 
medic vale J, Pans: I, Vnn 


125 


Canon, Raoul 1924c “La ivnth&amp;e doctnnale de Roger Bacon, Etudes de philosophic medievale 5. Paris: J, Vrm, 

Carton* Raoul 1 929. Le chitfre de Roger Bacon. Revue d histoire dc la philosophic 3. pp- 31-66. l 65-1 “9 
Casaubon. Meric. 1659. A True and Faithful Relation of What Passed Between Dr. John Dee and Some Spirits, London 
Pnnted bv D Maxwell. 

Cecchetti. Bartolomeo. 1868/69. “Le Scritture Occulte nella Diplomazia Veneziana' in Aits del Real istituto Veneto di 
Scienze, Letter e ed Am, Senes III 14. p. 1185. 

Charles. Emile. 1861. Roger Bacon: sa pie, ses outrages, set doctrines da pres des textes inedsts. Bordeaux: G. Gou no tui- 
tion. 

Clement, Adolf. 1926, “Sur V indication de la composition de la poudre a feu chez Roger Bacon.'* Archivio de Storm 
della Scienza 7, pp, 34-35, 

Cockayne, T, O. I860. Leechdoms. Wortcunning and Statcraft of Early England, London. Chronicles and Memorials v 
Courtnev, William L. 1892. “Roger Bacon. ' In Studies at Leisure. London: Chapman and Hall. Ltd, 

Crow lev. Theodore, 1950. Roger Bacon . the Problem of the Soul in His Philosophical Commentaries. Louvain: Editions 
de I institut superieure de philosophic. 

Crow lev, Theodore. 1951-52. “Roger Bacon: The Problem of Universal in His Philosophical Commentaries. Bulletin 
of the John Ry lands Library 34, 

Currier. Prescott. 1970-1976. "Voriuch MS. Transcription Alphabet; Plans for Computer studies; Transcribed Text of 
Herbal A and B Material: Notes and Observations.’ 1 Unpublished communications to John H. Tilrman and M. 
D lmpeno. Dr mariscntta, Maine. 

Dailev. William. 1975. The Mirror of Ale him y, Composed by the Famous Friar, Roger Bacon, etc,, uith the Smaragdtnt 
Table of Hermes, Trismegtstus, of Alchemy , Los Angeles f facsimile). 

Dalgarno. George. 1661 , Art Signorum, Vulgo Character Universalis e t Lingua Philosophia , London F Haves 
Dalgarno. George, 1680. Didascaiocophus. Oxford: Printed at the Sheldonian Theater (Menston: Scholar Press. 19"L 
facsimile) . 

Deacon* Richard. 1968. John Dee. London: Frederic Muller 
Dee, John. 1664. Monas Hi fro glypbica, Antwerp. 

Dee. John. 1842. The Private Diary of Dr. John Dee. Edited by James Richard HaJliwell. London: Printed for the Camden 
Society bv J. B. Nichols and Son. (Reprinted New York: AMS Press, 1968.) 

Dee. John. 1963 Diary of John Dee. Franklin, New Hampshire: Hillside Press. 

Dee. John. 1964, 'Monas Hi eroglvphica. Translated bv C, H, josten. Ambtx 12. pp. 84-221. 

De Givrv, Grillot. 1971. Witchcraft, Magic and Alchemy. Translated bvj. Courrenav Locke. New York: Dover, 

Delorme. F. M. 1911. "Un opuscule inedit de Roger Bacon G.F.M.' Archivum Franciscanum Histoncum 4, 

DeRola. Stanislas Klossowski, 1973. The Secret Art of Alchemy, New York: Avon Publishers. 

D Impeno. M. E. 1976. "New Research on the Vovnich Manuscript: Proceedings of a Seminar. Washington, D C. 
30 November 1976. Pnvatelv circulated. 

Dioscondes. 1959. The Greek Herbal of Dioscondes, Illustrated by a Byzantine. A.D 5 12. Englished by John Goo dyer 
A.D. 1 655. New York: Hafner. 

Du hem. Pierre M. M. 1913^1959. Le systeme du monde: histoire des doemnes cosmologtques de Platon a Copermc. 
Pans: A. Hermann. 

Duthie. George lan. 1970. Elizabethan Shorthand and the First Quarto of King Lear. Fol croft. Pa. : Folcroft Press. 

Easton, Stewart C 1952. Roger Bacon and His Search for a Universal Science. Oxford. (Reprinted New York: Russell 6c 
Russell. 1971.) 

Evans. Robert John Weston. 1973. Rudolph II and His World: A Study in Intellectual History , J 5 76-/6/2. Oxford 
Clarendon Press, 

Feelv. Joseph M. 1943 Roger Bacon's Cipher: The Right Key Found. Rochester, New York; n,p. 

Fell-Smith, Charlotte. 1904. John Dee . London: Constable and Co.. Ltd. 

Feret. P. 1891, Les impnsonnements de Roger Bacon," Revue des questions ktstoeiques 50, pp, 119-142, 

Festugiere, Andre Mane Jean. 1 944— 1 954. La revelation d' Hermes Tnsmegiste. Paris: Lecoffre. 

Fescugicre, Andre Marie Jean. 1967. Hermit ism c et mystique pasenne. Paris: Au bier- Montaigne. 

Folkingham. William. 1620. Brachigraphy: or the Art of Short Writing . Amsterdam: Theatrum Orbis Tcrrarum 
Frankowska, Malgorzata. 1971. Scienria as Interpreted by Roger Bacon. Translated bv Ziermslaw Zienkiew iez. Warsaw 
U,S. Department of Commerce, National Technical Information Service. Springfield. Va, (Original publication 
Warsaw: 1969.1 


126 


I 


French. Peter J. I 9~2. lohn Dee. London: Ruucledce und Kegan Paul. 

'Friar Bacon The Sutton (New York &gt; 125 i December 22. 1926). p. 65 b, 

Friedman. Elizebeth. 1 962. "The Most Mysterious MS. — Still an Enigma/ Washington D.C. Post , 5 August. EL EV 
Friedman. William F. and Eli/ebeth S. 1959, "Acrostics. Anagrams, and Chaucer/' Philological Quarterly 5h ( January i. 
PP 1-20. 

Garland. Herbert. 1921. "The Mvsterv of the Roger Bacon Cipher MS/ Bookman s Journal and Print Collector 
(London) 5. New Senes * October), pp, 11-16. 

Geiuler. H. 1959. Comtmus and die Sprache. Heidelberg. 

Gemelli. Agostino, 1914. Scrim Vari Puhhlicati in Occa stone del VII Centenarto della Sascita Ji Ruggero Bacnne. 
Florence: Librana Ed t trice Florentma. 

Gerard. |ohn. 1635, The Herbal!. London: Adam islipjoice Norton and Richard Whitakers i Reprinted bv Dover. W" s 
Gessman. Gustav W. 1922. Die Gehemsymboie der Alchymte. Arznerkunde and Asirologte des MitteLt Iters. Berlin: 
Verlag von Karl Siegismund. 

Gilson. Etienne. 192B. (Review of the Newbold-Kent Book) Rhme critique dbtstotre et de Imerature (Pans) 95 New 
Series ( August I. pp, 328-383 

Giulieni. Francesco. 1968. Stone dalle Scrrtture Veloci , Firenze: Giunti. G. Barbera. 

Goldsmith. Edmund, ed. 1886, Bibliotheca Cunosa The Famous History of Fryer Bacon. Edinburgh. 

Grattav John H, G.. and Singer. Charles J. 1952. Anglo-Saxon Magic and Medicine . Illustrated Specially tr*,n: 
the Semi -Pagan Text 'Lacnunga'. London: Oxford i'nversitv Press. 

Graubard. Mark Aaron. 1953- Astrology and Alchemy: Two Fossil Sciences. New York: Philosophical Library 
Greene. Robert. 1594. The Honourable Histone of Fnar Bacon and Friar Bungay, London: Printed tor Edward \\ hue 
(Reprinted New York: AMS Press. 1970). 

Groves. Edward 1846. Pastlogia: An Essay Towards the Formation of a System of Universal Language t both Written 
and Visual Dublin: James McGlashan, 

Gundel. Wilhelm. 1936. Dekane und Dekanstembilder. Studiender Bibliothek Warburg 19. 

Hajdu, Helga. 1936, Das mnemotechnische Schrifttum des Mittelalters. Vienna. 

Hall. Maulv Palmer. 1964. The Mystical and Medical Philosophy of Paracelsus . Los Angeles: Philosophical Research 
Society. 

HaiL Manlv Palmer. 1971. Codex Rosae Cruets. Los Angeles: Philosophical Research Society, 

Heck. Erich. 1957. Roger Bacon: tin mttttialterlichtr Versuch finer htstortschen und systematise h R eh grans u is sens i haft, 
Ph.D. Dissertation, Bonn. 

Held. Gustav, 1 88 L Roger Bacons praktisebe Philosophic. Jena. 

Hiidegardis.. 191 3, Die Kompositionen der HeiL Published bv Joseph Gmelch. Dusseldorf: L. Schwann (facsimile k 
H ill Sir George Francis. 1915. The Development of Arabic Numerals in Europe , Oxford: Clarendon Press 
Hi me. Henrv W. L. 1904, "Fnar Bacon/' In The Origin of Gunpowder. London: Longmans. Green and Co. p, 14 L 
Himc, Henrv W. L. 1914. "Roger Bacon and Gunpowder/ In Roger Bacon Essays. Edited bv A. G. Little. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, pp. 321-335, 

Hi me. Henrv W. L&lt; 1915. "Friar Bacon, ' in The Origin of Artillery. London: Longmans. Green and Co., pp. 102-1 16. 
Hoffmans. Hadelm, 1906. "Une theorie mcumoniste de la connaissance du XIII siecic.' Revue neoscolastique de 
philosophic 1 3 , pp. 37 1-39 L . 

Hoffmans. Hadelin. 1907, "La svnthese doctrinale de Roger Bacon/' Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophic 14. pp 
196-224. 

Hoffmans. Hadelin. 1908. "La genese des sensations d'apres Roger Bacon. " Revue neoscolastique de philosophic 15. 

pp. 32-46. 

Hoffmans. Hadelin. 1909a. La sensibilitc et les modes de la connaissance da pres Roger Bacon/' Revue neoscolastique 
de philosophic 16, pp, 32-46. 

Hoffmans, Hadelin. 1909b. 'L'incuition mvshque et la science/' Revue neoscolastique de philosophic 16. pp. 370-39“ 
Hoffmans, Hadelin. 1926, "L experience chez Roger Bacon/ Revue neoscolastique de philosophic 21. pp, 170-190. 

Hugo. Herman. 1617. De Prtma Scribendi Origtne et Umversa Ret Uterariae Antiquitate. Auvers. 

James, Montague Rhodes. 1903 Ancient Libraries of Canterbury and Dover. Cambridge: The University Press. 

James. Montague Rhodes. 1921. AI55 Formerly Owned by Dr. John Dee , London: Bibliographical Society Transactions’ 
(Supplement), 

Johncn. Chr. 1940. Geschichte der Stenographic. Berlin: H, Apitz. 


127 


Jos ten. C. H An l n known Chapter in the Life nf Juhn Dee hmrna/ *d //'f U v *#r^t#r^ jia/ I tit* r i - v 

pp, 223-21~ 

jourdam. C, L 888 Discussions dt quelques primes de U philosophic Jt Rocer Baum. In F.xcnrsifim i*t*i*»rtun 
philosophises . Pans: Firmin-Didur et Cie.. pp. 129-141 i Reprinted Frankfurt/ M. : Miners a*Vtr be. 1966 ■ 

Kahn. David. 1967 The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing. New York: Macmillan, pp 86^-K^2. 1 120-1 12! 
Keicher. O. 191 3 Der Intellect us A gens bci Rosier Baco In Studien der Ceschichte der Philosophic. Supplement i 
Munster: 1. W . pp 297-308. 

Kipling. Rudvard. 1926 The Eve ot Allah/ In Debits and Credits. London: Macmillan. 

Kirchtr, Athanasius 1663 Polygraphia Nora et Cm vet sails ex Combination Arte Detecta. Rome. 

Kocher. Paul, 1913 Science and Religion in Elizabethan England. San Marino, California, The Huntingdon Libran 
Kraus. Hans P n.d. Thirty* Five Manuscripts. Catalogue lot). 

Knscher, Jeffrey P. 1969. The Voynich Manuscript. Harvard Cm verst cv. 

Liebeschuu. H 1930. Das alegonsche Welthtld Jet heilige H tide gar d von Bingen, Leipzig and Berlin: B. G leubntr 
Little. Andrew G . \ 89 2. The Grey Friars in Oxford, Oxford : Clarendon Press. 

Little. Andrew G. 1914 Roger Bacon Essays. Oxford: Clarendon Pr«i. (Reprinted New York: Russell &amp;: Russell 
1972,1 

Little, Andrew G, 1929. Roger Bacon: Lecture on a * Mast er Mind*. London: H, Milford. 

Longpre. E. 19^8. "La summa dialectic* de Roger Bacon/ Archhum Franciscanum Historic/* nt &gt;1. pp 20-4— 2oV 
Longwell. H. C. 19*18. The Theory of Mind of Roger Bacon. Ph.D. Dissertation. Emperor Willumv l nntrvitv 
Strasbourg. 

Lutz. Edward. 1936. Roger Bacon's Contribution to Knowledge. New York: J. F. Wanner. Inc 
Maccagnolu. Enzu, 1915. ' Ruggero Bacone e U Metafnica Classic* Studt Francescam 12. 

Maffre. Camille. 1863 Roger Bacon . Pans. 

Mandonnet. P !910. "Roger Bacon et 1c Speculum AsrronomiaeV* Revue neosoiastipue de philosophic. 

Mandonnet. P 1913, Roger Bacon et la composition dcs trois Opus /' Revue neoscoiasttque de philosophic. 

Manly, John M. 1921a. 'Roger Bacon s Cipher Manuscript/' American Review of Reviews 64 rjulvi, pp. 101-106, 

Manlv. John M 1921b. 'The Most Mysterious Mamucript in the World: Did Roger Bacon Write It and Has the Kc\ 
Been Found:/' Harper j Monthly Magazine 143 tJulvLpp. 186-197, 

Marilv. John M. 1931. Roger Bacon and the Voynich MS Speculum 6 i julvi. pp. 341-391 
Massa. Eugenio 1913. Ruggero Baconee la Poetic* di Anstotele. " Giornaie Crtttca della Filosofia Italiana i2 
Mass* Eugenio, 1955a Ruggero Bacone — Erica e Poetica nella Stona deli' Opus Maim. Rome Edizioni di Scoria t 
Litteratura. 

Massa. Eugenio. 1 911b. Vita Civile e Cnsi Latina in Ruggero Bacone/ Rassegna di Politic a e di Stona i . 

Massif. Mittord C. 1934. The Roger Bacon or R. R . Dee Chess Code. n.p. : Press of Fremont Pai ne. Inc. 

Mathers. $, L, MacGregor. 191 1. The Kahhalah Unveiled, London. (Reprinted New York: S. Wetser. 1968. &gt; 

Mathers. S. L. MacGregor. 1974. The Key of Solomon the King ( Cdavtcula Solomoms ). Sou First Translated and 
Edited from Ancient *M£5. in the British Museum . New York: Samuel Weiser. Inc, 

Mathers. S. L. MacGregor, 1971. The Book of the Sacred Magic of Ahramelin the AUge. As Delivered hy Abraham 
the Jeu unto His Son Lantech , A.D, 1458. New York: Dover. 

Matrod. H. 1927. “Sur Roger Bacon ( 1214-1294)." Etudes franascatnes 29. 

Mav. J, l 929, Dte heilige Hildegard. Munchen. 

McCracken. George E. 1 948. "Athanasius Kircher s Universal Polvgraphv/' Isis 39 (November i . pp. 2 1 1-228. 

McKaig. Beni. n.d. The Vovmch Manuscript — Cipher of the Secret Book Reprinted courtcsv Independent News- 
papers Inc.. San Dtego, California. 

McKeon. Richard, 1928. "Roger Bacon/' The Nation 127 (August 29). pp. 201-206. 

Meister. Alovs. 1896. "Zur Kenntms des venetiamschen Chiffrenwesrns/' Histohsches Jahrhuch 17 pp. 319-330- 
Meister. Alovs, 1902. Dte An fange der moderntn diplomatise hen Geheimschrtft, Padcrborn: F. Schoningh. 

Meister. Alovs. 1 906 Die Gehetmschrift im Dienste der papsthchen Kune . Paderborn: F. Schoningh. 

Miano. Vincenzo, 196(1. "Tradiaionalismo e Umanesimo in Ruggero Bacone/' In L'homme et son desrtn d'apres Us 
pens furs du moyen age, acres du premier congres Internationale de philosophic medic vale. Lou vain* Pa ns. 

Moorsel. Gerard von. 1911. The Mysteries of Hermes Trtsmegistus. Utrecht. 

Mmes, Montrose J. 1921. * A Cinderella on Parchment: The Romance of the New 600- Year-Old Bacon Manuscript 
Hearst s international, pp . 16—17,71. 


128 


Neivbuld. William Romaint 1921, The Gphtr ot Roger Bacon, Tn/tijacri/ai.t of the Qdlcg r of *t Phila- 

Jelphia 43 * 192 1 J. pp. &lt;31 — Tn. Read April 20. 1921. 

Newbold. William Rumaine. 1928. The Cipher of Roger Bacon, Edited wuh foreword and notes bv Prof Roland Grubb 
Kent. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Nock. A*D.* and Festugiere, A. M. j 1945. Hermes Tnsmegiste. Paris. 

O'Neill, Hugh. 1944, 'Botanical Observations on the Vo vnich MS.” Speculum 19 IJamiarW. p. 120 

Panofskv. Erwin. 1954. "Answers to Questions for Prof E. Panofskv. " Personal communication to William F Fried- 
man, March 19. 1954, 

Pasini. Luigi. IS 7 3. Delle Scrinure in Qfra Usate Jaffa Repithhlica Veneta. Venezia: Re gin Ardmio Gcncralc Ji 
Venezia, p. 29 l . 

Peers. Edgar Allison. 1929. Ramon La IL a Biography. New York: Macmillan. 

Pelzer. A. 1919. "Une source mconnue de Roger Bacon, Alfred de Sarasehel. Archivum Franciscan am Hisumcum 12. 
p .45. 

Petersen. Theodore C. 1953. Notes to Mr. Tiltmans |i95lj Observations on the Vnrnich Cipher MS Unpublished 
April 23. 1953. 

Petersen. Theodore C- 1966. Hand Transcript and Concordance of the Vovnich Manuscript and Other Working Paper* 
In the Friedman Collection. George Marshall Library. Lexington* Virginia 

Philalethcs. Acvrenaeus. 16 7 8 Ripley Retir'd. London: Printed bv T Ratcliff and N. Thompson, tor W G&gt;uper 

Poisson. Albert. 1890, Cinq status Jafchimie. (Paracelsus. Albertus Magnus. Rogtr Bacon. Ramon Lull. Arm do dt 
Vi llano va. i Paris: Bibliocheque Chacornat. 

Pollard. A. W.. and Redgrave, C. R. 1969. A Short -Title Catalogue of Books Printed in England ami Ireland and 
English Books Prtmed Abroad /4 7 5-/640. London: The Bibliographical Society. 

Porta, Gjovannie Battista. 1563- De Fterti vis Liter arum Notts Vulgo de Zi fens. Naples. 

Porta. Giovanni Battista. 1644. Magia Naturalrs. Levden, 

Powvs* John Cow per. 1956. The Brazen Head., London: MacDonald. 

Pratt. Fletcher. 1942. Secret and Urgent. Garden City* N.J.: Blue Ribbon Books I see especial I v pp. 30-38). 

Redgrove, Herbert Stanley. 1920. Roger Bacon . the Father of Experimental Science and Medieval Occultism. London 
W Rider 6c Son, Ltd. 

Reitzenstein, Richard 1904 Potmandres. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner. 

Reventlow, Carl Otto (Carl Christian Ottoi. 1843, Lehrbuch des Mnemorechmk. Stuttgart: Tubingen 

Review of 'The Cipher of Roirer Bacon ( Newbold r," Quarterly Revreu of Biology (Baltimore. Md + 3 December 
1 928 J . pp 595-596. 

Reville. John C.. S j. 1921 "Friar Roger Bacon and Modern Science." America: A Catholic Revteu of the Week 2&gt; 
(Mav 21 1. pp. 1 01-102, 

Riplev. George, 1591 The Compound of Ale by my. London: T. Or win. 

Ripley* George. 1756. Georgu RtpUei . . Chymische Schriften. etc. Translated by Benjamin Roth-Schokzen. Wienn: 

Zu finden bev J. P. Krauss. 

Ritter. H. and Plessner. M. 1962. Picatrix. Studies of the Warburg Institute 27, 

The Roger Bacon Manuscript: What It Looks Like, and a Discussion of the Possibilities of Decipherment, Scien* 
tific American. Mav 28. 1921. p. 421/ 

Rohde. Eleanour 5* 19 7 I. The Old English Herbals * ( 1922) Reprinted New York: Dover Publications. 

Rose. Valentin. 1974. Tironische Ndten in Stenographie im 1 2ten Jahrhundert Hermes 8. p. 303 

Rossi* Paolo. 1960 Clavis Universalis. Milan -Naples. 

Rossi, Paolo. 1961. The Legacv ot Ramon Lull in Sixtetnth-Centurv Thought. Warburg Institute. Medieval and 
R enaissa nee Studies 5.pp. 182-213- 

Rossi. Paolo. 1974. Francesco Bacone: Dalla Magia alia Sc/enza , Torino: G. Einaudi. 

Sacco, Luigi, 1947. T'n Frimato Jtahano; La Crittografia nei Secoh XV e XVI. Bolletino del/' hrituro Jt Coltura 
JelT Arma del Gen to 26 f December i . 

Saisset. Emile Edmond 1862. P recurse urs et disciples de Descartes. Paris: Didicr et Cie. 

Saisset. M. 1861 , "’Roger Bacon. " Revue des Jeux-mondes 3 1 4, p. 369. 

Salomon. Richard 1934, Review of Maniv $ Critique of Newbold s Decipherment. Bihliothek Warburg, Kulturu is- 
sencbafilicbe Bibliographic zum Sac hie hen der An tike l . p. 96. 

Salomon. Richard. 1936. Opiums de Camstris , Weltbtld und Bekenntnisse eines avtgnonischen Kleriker des XIV JH. 
London Warburg Institute 


129 


Sand vs. Sir John E 1914. Roger Bacon. Oxford: University Press 

Suxi. Fritz. 1915. 192 7 . 'Verzeichms astro! ogischcr und mythologise her Handschrtften dcs fartmischen MineLdtcrs 
in Sitzungsherichte der heidelherger Akademte Jer Wissenschaften ( phi l osophisch - bis to ruche Klasse) 6 and 1 6. 

Scan. W* 1924-56. Hermetica^ Oxford. 

Sehgmann, Kurt. 1948. Magic, Supeenaturaltsm and Religion. New York: Random House. Pantheon. 

Se*nec.J* 1953- The Survival of the Pagan Gods. Translated by B. F. Sessions. New York: BoJIingen. Pantheon. 

Sharp. D. £. 1930. Franciscan Philosophy at Oxford tn the 1 3th Century Oxford: Clarendon Press, ( Reprinted New 
York: Russell &amp; Russell. 1964.1 

Shulman. David. 1976. An Annotated Bibliography of Cryptography. New York: Garland Publishing. Inc 

Shumaker. Wavne 1972. The Occult Sciences in the Renaissance: A Study in Intellectual Patterns . Berkelev. Uah- 
forma: University of California Press. 

Silvester, | akob. 1526. Opus Notuns Prae feeds A return: Imperatonbus Exeratuum. etc . Rome, 

Singer. Charles Joseph 1927. The Herbal in Antiquity. Bungav* Suffolk: Printed bv R. Clav Sc Sons. Ltd. *Also in 
Journal of Hellenic Studies 47.) 

Singer. Charles Joseph 1928, From Magic to Science. New York: Boni and Livenght f Reprinted bv Dover, 1958) 

Singer* Charles Joseph. 1959. A History of Biology. 3rd rev. ed. London and New York: Abelard *5chu man. 

Singer. Charles Joseph. 1975. The Scientific Views and Visions of Saint Hildegard." In Studies in the History and 
Method of Science. &lt; Oxford: 1921 » Reprinted New York: Arno Press ivoi. 1. pp. 1-58). 

Singer. Charles Joseph, and Underwood. E. A. 1962. A Short History of Medicine. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Pres\ 

Striker, Dorothea Walev. 1928-31. Catalogue of Latin and Vernacular Alchemical Manuscripts tn Great Britain and 
Ireland. Dating from Before the Sixteenth Century , Brussels: M. La martin. 

Smger. D W. 1932, "Alchemical Writings Attributed to Roger Bacon." Speculum 7. 

Smith, David Eugene, and Karpmski. Louis Charles. 1911. The Hindu-Arahtc Numerals. Boston and London Ginn 
and Company. 

Steele. Robert. 1928a. "Lufu Vopo Vir Can Utriet." Nature 121 (February 1 1 h pp. 208-209, 

Steele. Robert, 1928b. "Science in Medieval Cipher." Nature 122 (October 13&gt;. pp 563-565. 

Steele, Robert. 1933. "Roger Bacon as Professor A Student's Notes." Isis 20. pp. 53-7 1 . 

Steele, Robert. 1975 "Roger Bacon and the Stare of Science in the Thirteenth Century." In Studies in the History and 
* Method of Science. Edited bv Charles Joseph Singer. (Oxford: 1921 . ) Reprinted New York: Arno Press, 

Storms, Godfrid. 1975, Anglo-Saxon Magic. (The Hague: M. Nijhott. 1948. i Reprinted bv Foicrotr Library Editions. 

Strong, Leonell C 1945, Anchonv Askham. the Author of the Vovmch MS, Science i Lancaster, Pa. UJt 'June 
151, pp. 608-609, 

Strong, Leonell C* and McCawlev. G, L. 1947. A Verification of a Hitherto Unknown Prescription of rht loth 
Century." Bulletin of the History of Medicine I Baltimore. Md.) 21 I November- December i. pp, 898-904. 

Tavior. Henrv Osborne. 1922. Greek Biology and Medicine. Boston: Marshall Jones Company. 

Thomson. S. H. 1937. An Unnoticed Treatise of Roger Bacon on Time and Motion,” Isis 27. pp. 219-224. 

Thorndike. Lvnn. 1916. "The True Roger Bacon. American Literary Review- 2 L pp. 237-25* and 468 — 180 

Thorndike, Lvnn- 1921. Letter in Correspondence Column. Scientific American, I une 25. p. 509. 

Thorndike- Lvnn. 1923-58. A History of Magic and Experimental Science. New York: Macmillan. 

Thorndike* Lvnn. 1929. "Roger Bacon, American Historical Reneu , (Lancaster, Pa.) 34 (January), pp. 3 l *-519. 

Thorndike. Lvnn. 1963, Science and Thought in the ISth Century: Studies in the History of Medicine and Surgery, 
Natural and Mathematical Science. Philosophy and Politics. New York: Hafner. 

Ttltman. John H. 1951, "Interim Report on the Vovmch MS." Personal communication to Wlllum F Friedman 5 
Mav 1951. 

Tihman* John H. 196T The Vovmch MS Script of an address presented to the Baltimore Bibliophiles March 
195 L 

Tihman* John H, 1968. "The Vovmch Ma nuscript, the Mosr Mysterious Manuscript in the World. Paper pm arch 
circulated Baltimore. 

Top. Alexander. 1603 The Qliue Leafe: Or Universal! A BCE. Wherein is Set F north the Creation of Letters London. 

Tnthemius* Joannes. 1564. Polygraphtae Libn Sex. Cokmiae. 

Tmhcmius* Joannes* 1 606 Steganographia. Frankfurt. 

Vanderwalle. C. B 1929, Roger Bacon dans rhistotre de la philolagie. Pans. 

Volkmann. Ludwig. 1929* Ars Memoraova. Jahrbuch Jer kunst bistort sc hen Sam mitt ng m Wien X,F Sonderheti 
30. Vienna, pp. 11 1-203, 


130 


Vim Aretm.j Chr. Freiherr. 1800 Theorie Jer Mnemontk. Sal* bach. 

Von Boehn. Max. 1964, Die Mode: Menschen und Moden im lb. fahrhundert. Munich: F. Bruckmann K G 

Voynich* Wilfrid M&lt;; Vovnich* Ethel; and Nill* A. M. 1 917'* 196L Notes concerning the history of the cipher manu~ 
script. Voynich Archives* Library of the Grolier Club of New York. 

Vovnich* Wilfrid M. 1921 A Preliminary Sketch of the Historv of the Roger Bacon Cipher Manuscript. ’ Transact 
lions of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia 43* pp- 415—430. Read April 20, 1921, 

Waite, Arthur Edward, 1929. The Holy Kabbalah . London: Williams and Norgaie Limited (Reprinted New Hvdt 
Park, N. Y.: University Books* I960), 

Waite* Arthur Edward. 1961, The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross. New York: University Books 

Walker, Daniel Pickering 1958, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Piano to Campanula. London: The Warburg 
Institute. 

Walsh, James |. 1921, Vindication of Medieval Science.” America a Catholic Retieu of the Week 25 i September 
IUL pp. 488-490. 

Wa ii. Rudolf. 1928. Das Verbatims von Giaube und- W is sen bet Roger Bate. Freiburg (Schweiz I : St Paulusdruckerei. 

Warburg Institute* University of London. 1967. Warburg Institute Library Catalogue , 2nd ed, Boston G K HaJL 
(And SuppL London: 197 LI 

Wedel, Theodore Otto, 1920. The Medieval Attitude Touard Astrology. New Haven: Yale University Press. 

Welbor i, M. C 1932. "The Errors of the Doctors According to Fr. Roger Bacon, Isis 18. pp 20-92. 

Wernci. Alfred. 1963- "The Most Mysterious Manuscript.” Horizon 5 (January I. pp. 4-9. 

Werner. Karl. 1879a. Die Psychologic. Brkenntnts- and Wissenschaftslehre des Roger Baco . Wien i Reprinted Frank 
furt/Main: Minerva-Verlag. 1966.) 

Werner* Karl. 1879b. "Die Kosmologie und algemeine Naturlehre des Roger Baco. In Wiener Akademte. Sttzung?- 
benchte 94, pp. 484-612* 

Wcstacott. Evalvn, 1953- Roger Bacon in Life and Legend. London: Rockliff. (Reprinted Fukroft. Pa.: Fokroft 
Librarv Editions, 1974.) 

Wilkins. John* 164L Mercury, or the Secret and Suift Messenger. London: Printed bv i. Norton* tor John Mavnard, 
and Timothy Wilkins, etc* 

Wilkins. John, 1668a, An Essay Toward Real Character, or a Philosophical Language. London; Printed tor 5a Gd- 
librand. and for John Martvn, primer to the Roval Society, 

Wilkins, John* 1668b. An Alphabetical Dictionary . etc. London: Printed bv J M for Samuel GeliibrunJ and li&gt;hn 
Martin, 

Willis. John, 1602. The Art of Stenographic. London. 

Wilson* Grove* 1942, "Roger Bacon." In Great *Vle« of Science: Their Lives and Discoveries New York: The New 
Home Librarv, pp. 72-79. 

Woodruff. Francis Winthrop* 1938* Roger Bacon, a Biography . London: j, Clarke &amp; Co.* Ltd. 

Yates* Frances. 1954. 1960, "The Arc of Ramon Lull," Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes P, pp 115. 

23, p. 1, 

Yates. Frances. 1964. Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. London: Rout ledge and Keg an Paul. 

Yates* Frances. 1966. The An of Memory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Yates. Frances. 1968 "The Hermetic Tradition in Renaissance Science,' In An. Science and History in the Renat.\- 
sance. Edited bv C. H* Singleton. Baltimore* 

Yates* Frances. 1969. Theatre of the World * Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Yates, Frances* 1972. The Rosicrucian Enlightenment * London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 

Zimanskv. Cun A. 1970 "William F. Friedman and the Vovnich MS." Philological Quarterly 49. pp. 433-44? 


131 


fSDEX 


Xme The references m the index ire in Ehc turm til paragraph 
numben rather than pag r number i The numbers separated bv 
periods outside ol parentheses sand tor paragraph numbers primed 
in the text; numbers within parenihesei indicate which subsequent 
unnumbered paragraph or paragraphs contain the reference. Foe 
example the reference '3,34(2-4. 6j" menu that the indexed 
item wu mentioned in the second, third, tad fourth unnumbered 
subparagrapm immedtacrlv after the printed subheading "3 3 4 

Abacus. H. IOf 2i 

Abaelard Peter, schoLm: methud of. " 3(2i 
Abracadabra. 9.4.2f 3* 

Abrameim. magical intern of. 8.4f I J. 8-4, 3( 1-^1. 8-61 I p 
A bbreviation of words m Vovmch apher, 4.4. 2(3. t5i 
Abbreviations Greek 3 1.21 l L 9.1(11 istt mUo Greek shorthand L 
Latin. 4.2(9). 3.212. 4-5 L 9.N1-3L fyei 22. 39-40. similar 
to Vovnich symbols. 4. 1.2l2, 3L 4. 1.3(5). 9,1 (2), 9, 1.3)2), 
fig, n 

AccoummT machines. 6.2(2-V&gt; 

Attixts t aromaticaJ in mdet anti ivnrhttn Uncut m. 
*&gt;3i3_&gt;r m the Vcnrnich teat. 4.412-3- 9-IUi. 4 4.2i 3. 9. 

i7-im,6.6(i-2.3&gt;. 8. mu. fig, 2 ? 

Ages of man, 3 3 JM0L 3 3 4(2-4.61 

Agriculture as a topic of the Vovtuch text. 3~3.5(5 l 3 3 5f 1 ) 

Agnppa. Hear* CtwneJius. 3 3 4f I ). 8.2(2). 9*2(3) 

AlOereus 2. H 2), 3,4(1 L 6.3(3L 104SI 

Akhrmv 8.4 4(1 J, 8.8(1*91, 8 9(2. 4-5): ciphers associated with, 
7.4(3 6i, 8-8Mj. 9.2(1. 4). drawings similar to Vovwch 
manuscript drawings, 3 3. MB). 3.33(3), 8.8(7-91, 10(11), 
fig 36; possible topic of Vomich manuscript, 3.2.3(11, 3.3. 3* 7 L 

7 4(4*. 8JJI7&gt;. sear picture symbols in. 3-3-4(41. 5 3,6(3), 

8.4. H2L studied hr Roger Bacon. 7.2(3), 7 40 1; ivmboli used 
in. 3 3,H7 L 4-1-3' 3 1. 8.81 1 L 8 9&lt; 3. IIU. 9 4(lL 9.4.21 1-3*. 
IOi 111. tig 42; treatises on. attributed to Roger Bacon. 3 3-Vui. 
4.4.2(61. 3.1(1-21. 5.1.1(11. 7-3(3)- 7 4(3 l9.H2) 

Alronso the Wise, 8.4 J( 1 1 
Algorism. K 1 Or 1, 4l 
Aim* ft si of Ptolemy. 8 3(2» 

Alphabet Emxhian 9 4.4(3*61. fig 43 . Hebrew. 5.1(1 1, 8 4.2(1 1, 

8 9 4.HU 

Alphabets invented. 22.1(8), 9,2(1). 9.2(5*6 l 9 4. HU, 

9.4, M U2l bp. 43, magical . B 41 1 1, 8-4.4(21* 9,4.1(11; 

transcription 4. 1.3(4). 4 4f9l, 6 IlflJ, 6. 2(2-3), 6 4sjl, 

6 6(2). 6 7( 1 j 

Akcmpt. Cardinal. I , H li» 

American plants. 2 412) 

Arugrammtng, 4 4.2(7-6, Hi, 5 1. 1(1). 5. 1.2(1, 61. 6 5(3-4). 

8 7(11,9.2(21 
Analysis. Markovian. 6 7f 4i 
Angel, guardnn Str Guardian a nee I 
Angelic conversations of Dee and Kellev, 9 4 4U-6) 

Angels. 8-4.211 L 8 4 3(2): names of. 8.3(2), 8.4,2(2k 8.6(1), 
8.7(1 l 9.2(3). fig 33 

Anglo-Saxon hrrbah, 101 I. 7) 

Anglo Saxon medical magic 3 3 413 ). 9.4. 2( 2—3)- 1011,71 
Animal figures in medieval manuscripts. 3. 2. 3(4-5); tfl Voynich 
manuscript drawings 3.2. 1 (7-81, 3-2. 3(7). 3 3 7(1). fi r&gt; 8—10 
Apices. 8 10(21 

Apukius Platofucus. Herbmtmm of. I Oi 4. 6-7} 

Aquarius. Zodiac sign of. 3.3-3* 1 ) 

Arabic influence on medieval cosmology alchemy. 8.812): tsiroiogv 
and astronomy, 8 3(2): commentaries on Aristotle. 7.21 1-2). 


itiJ jImj in the sixth The rercrerue 7 S J l rtter* in me tif^f 
paragraph under subheading 3 1.2 . it, the paracrjph that Bear* 
that printed number m the text. hik ad mined h rhn mcthi^ % tt 
indexing places some additional Durden on the reader, it vlji 
adopted as a means ot substantially speeding publication ui thi&gt; 
monograph. It n mv sincere hope that the inti &gt;mcm erne t tea sinned 
bv the paragraph references will be minor and will nut detract trom 
the tucfuJncu or the index 

magical texts. H-) III v medua) traJitum * * % v H) 2 v. 
u/ja Numerals Hindu ^ Arabic 
Arabic language 2 3 mi 
A rabic origin of star names, 8, 3t 2 J 
Arabic script. 3.3 4(11). 4.2(3-6 j 
A rbierarv methods in anaJvsii at Vimuch (ext. 6 V 1 ■ 

Archaei lof Paracclsan medical school i. 5 5 5i(&gt;i 
Aeics. Zodiac sign of. 2. 2,2(5i 5 3 3* he hi 
Aristotle. *.2( l*2i. ' Vrfc. «f i . UH2i 
Afithmeticus nometu 1 la t«K "ttmftetu language l| ' ; 

An mtmrjTfttia. 6 h l - II . h o« 1 ». 9 Vi 2, * 

An moron* , 4 4 2i6j . 8.6i 1 j 
A rtificial memon See mirmorartoj 
An of memorv See An mamnrMins 
Art of Ramon Lull, 8, 1 1 5-6 1 . 9 2( 3 ' 

Ashmoie. Elias. 8 81 2. 4i.8 9f6l. 9 4 l i 
Aakhun. Anthony. 2,2.214 1 . 2.4(5). 5 3i2) 

Astral spnts. 3 3 7(6) 

Astrology. 3.3.4I3L 13 7(11. 5.4i5. 6), ’.2(5). 8 3U-V». 8 9 m-. 
m medicine, 3 3 4(3), B 5)4l. ivmbols used in. -a. I 
9 4i U. 9 4.2( 1-3 5 ■ treatises on, 3 ,2 . 3t 1. 

Astronomy . 8 3* 1*3 1 

Avicenna medicaJ wr icings ot S 5 * ! ■ 

Backhouse. William. H 8) 4 1 

Bacon. Pranas. 7 3(3, 9i. 9.2)’), 9 vi 2* 

Bacon. Roger. 2, 2. 2(1). ? 4i t ). 5. fill. 6ii 3 1 ’* A* i 

9 ill-2); alchemv treatises attributed to. ^ 5 5i0i h - t 2 m« 
5.1(1*21. 5 1. nil. ’3(3&gt;, 74(3). 9Jt2). smdkxt 
on. 7 413), attacks on his concern porancs. ~ 5&lt;2) aurhi»r m 
Vovnich manuscript 2 If 1-5 6i. 2.2, lilt 2,2.2) 1 1- 2,5 &gt;1 

5.1 111. 5.2(5 1, on concealed writing. 4 4,2(6' 5.1 ih; lontri- 

buiions to science. 2-1(2). 5 1 .2(J), 7.2r 3*4 1, ‘ )(l-2 -i 
debunking of his repetauon. 51. 2H). ^3i5i; experimental 
science of. 7 -2f3l- ' 3&lt;l-2), on Greek and Hebrew grammar 
MU). B. I ( 10) : imprisonmencs and persecution 2L2. 

7. 1.2(3). 7.2171. 7 3)4 1. inrernt of John Dee in his works. 
2.1 ! 8-9 ^ 12.1(3), 7,3(3); invenuon ot gunpowder. 9.2 2 
invenuor of telescope and microscope. 2.2,213). 5,1.2 v 

7.3(4), lost memorv art. 8. 1 1 9-10 &gt; s lost Scnpium PnnapmU. 
7.2(7 L 7_3f6l. medical doctrines, 2-2.1(4li- 3-3 5i5-6' T 3i 
7.4(3). 8.5(5): not author of Voynich manuscript. 2,2.2* 3* 
2.4t6i, 5,1-215)* 7 4N-4}, occult powers attributed to him 

2.1 U). 2,2. H3), 7.4141; study of ilchcmv, 7J(3 i, "4(3^: 

irudv of aphers 2 1(2). 4 4,2(6). 5, NIL 9.2U-2): scudi o ) 
languares. 5. ill L 7.2151- 8.1U0L tuppo^d references to. in 
Vovruch manuscript 2.2, M3), 3 4 [ 2 1 . 5 4t2J. ~*tl L works m 
□pher. 2.1(2), 9.2(1): works concerning, ’.It 1-3), " 3*4. 9i, 

7 4| 3l See miso Baton. Roger, works of 

Bacon, Roger works of. 2.1(16), 3 3-5(61. 52(1-2). ~^5' 
Comma tnm SitMttbum 5,21 1 ). " , .2(4i; Or Ptnpecma. 5.2il-, 
Dr Rrtmrdatwnt Ac cuim it u m Smtasttij. 3 3 .5i5l; E^rjioitf Jr 
Mtrmbdt Pott staff Arttt tt .Njirnr^e. 7 t 3j3), Opus Alaraj. " , 1 ! U. 


133 


7.2 (5l. 7.3(7). 7 4*4l; Op*J Mima, T.2l5i. Qpw Tertrnm. 
7.2(5) 

ft* Lai h* Ian (mystical language of Sufi sect), 9 4.3l2i 
h* lo, Peeer, shorthand intern of. $.1*2(1 ) 

Banudegoow. 3,5. UII 
Bitt. grammatical, J*r Sera*. grammaacxl 
Bath*. therapeutic. 33-MI). 63(4) 

Beck, Give, synthetic language of. 6.6f 3*6) 

Beddl Bishop. synthetic language of. 6.6(7) 

Beginning - middle- end structure of Voynich int words," 4.4fl0l. 

4.4.21 9. 1 7 1. 6.6(1 -2). 8, Ml l), 9.2(7). 9.3I5K fig 27 
Beginnings of Voynich wit 'wards," 4.4(101, 4.42(9. 17 j. 5#r 
mho Beginning -middle -end structure of Voynich rest words" 
Betnecke Rare Book Library fYik Uoiverury), 1-2(81. 33 6(2) 

Bible in*. 3.23(4). 9-4.20) 

Birds. figures of. 33. 1 (U 333(10-1 IK 83(6). 8 90) 

Bottom*. 1,1(4), 2.1(12), 3*3. 5(6), 8.9(3) 

Boo* ofEmornb (John Dee), 93.4(3) 

Botxmad lUuMnaons. 6.6(8). 10(1-11 pmim); copying and rt- 
copying of. 3 3 10). 10(3. 11); from nature. 10(2. 3. 8. 10); 
Greek, 10(2-3). medieval. 10(8-9) 

Baanv. eerie tustars if. 10(3) 

Box. apher. 53(3-3* 7-8). 9 4 4(3-6) 
firadiygraphse [shorthand system!, 9 l.2( l&gt; 

Brachygnphy. Set Shorthand 

Bright, Thom**, shorcha&amp;d system of, 9. 1 . 1 ( l ). fig 38 
Brme. Sir Thomas, 2,1(16), 8.9(6) 

Brumbaugh, Robert $.. 2.1(13). 2.2. 1(3), 2.2.2(31. 23(4). 2.4(6). 
33-1(2). 333(6). 33 6(2-3). 3 4(2). 4. 1.2(1). 43(1. 5. 8). 
3(1). 5-40-9), fig. 26 
Bnanfeli. Otto, botimca! woodcuts of . 10(101 
Bruno, Giordano. 8. 1 (6-7). 6,2(2). 8. 3(3). 8 4(1) 

Building*. repraennaoiu of. in Voynich manmenpt, 33 6(2) 

Bull, figure of. 2-2.213 ). 333(3). fig. 10 

Cabal*. 3 3-4(1), 3.1(1), 3 1-1(11, 8.1(3). 83(2), 87(1-2), 

influence on ocher magical system*. 8 4.2(1). 8-43(1). 8 4.4(1), 
8-9(2. 4). 9 4.4(6) 
aicidus. 8. 1(8). 93(2) 

GimdJo. Giuho. memory art of. 8-1(6) 

Camstru. Opcmusde. 3-23(1, 3—4) 

"Cam" in Voynich manuscript drawings. 333(2) 

Capricorn. Zodiac sign of. 3.3 3(1) 

Opucum. 2.4(2). 33-1(2) 

Carter, Dr Albert H loyptologie historian), 2.2*1(11, 2.2.2(31, 
23(4), 3.1(2), 3-2. 1(1. 3). 3.2.2(l-3) 

Canon. Raoul. 3. 1.2(3, 5) 

Cajaubon, Meric. 9.4. 4(1. 3-6) 

Cathartic. 63(31 

Cathedral*, decoration of medieval. 8. 1 (6) 

Cathode ray rube (CRT) display. 3-4(3). 6.7(2} 

Uthobc church. 4 4.2(1 7), 5. i -2(J). 7 3(4). 7.4(21 
Catholic phikMoohers. 7.1(2) 

Catholic University of America. 6,3f 1 ) 

Cell -like ftros. 3 .2-3(6), 3 3 4( 1, 7, 9-10), 33-6 (2). 3.2(4) 

Gdli, luring, teen in Voynich manuscript drawmgi, 5.2(4) 

Chificnm, 8. 10(2) 

Charactene (shorthand irstem), 9.1. 1(1), fig. 38 
Characters Chinese (j*r Chinese writing system ): distorted, 9-2(3). 
9.C3MI; Egyptian. 3,2 3(2 i. 84. MIJ. 9 4.1(1), fig. 41; He- 
brew Alphabet. Hebrew; Hebrew thinoml; magical. 

3 3 4(4), 8 4. MU. 8-6(1) ( tt* mho Alphabets, magical. Images, 
magical &gt; 

Char lo. Emile. 7.1(2) 


Charms- See Inca near ions. Languages, magical. Spells 
Chinese writing system. 4 1 Mil. 4.4. 1 tin ? ^ tJl . 

9.2(7) 

Chrnt. 3-2-3(3-6) 

Christian symbolism. 3.2,3(4-61, 33 4(9), 333(4), 8.8(3. 9) 

Cicero. 8-1(1. 3. 9) 

Cipher. Baconian, 4 4,2(3). 9,2(4); subratution. 41.2(1), 4 4l4- 
3), 44.2(3-6), 9-2f|. 3); transpositKKi, 4 4(6), 4 4.2(5). 
Tnthermao. 4 4.2(3), 9.2(4) 

Cipher dud. 8 1(5), 9.2(3) 

Ciphers. 4-4.20-2). 5 4(3), 9 2(3-4); inaem, 9.2 lP. medieval. 
3.4(2), 8-10(4). 9,2(1). fig 39. ro Papal correspond emc, 
9.2(5), 9 3 f 7J, Fig 39. studied b\ Roger Bacon. 2 l-i . 
4.4.2(61, 3. II IK 9 .2(1-2) 

Circle with three segments j symbolic map*. 3-3 4(4, 6. 111. 
3-3-6(2). 4.2(6) 

Games, philosophical Smm Subfecx categories. Syncategoremaa 
Clement IV (Pope), 7.2(3) 

"CJock face \ 2 4(6), 3. 3-6(5). 9 4 U2) 

Cloud -like formi in alchemy drawings. 8-8(9) - in drawings of Si 
Hiidcgarde, 3-2.3C5): tn Voynich manuscript. 3 3 M4). 3 3 4» I 
10). 3-3 5(3-4) 

Code book*, 4.4.2f 1 3, 18». 9-2J 31 

Codes, 4-4.21 1-3. 13. 15. 17), 9 4 4(6). mcdiral and Renans 
sance. 4. 1.2(1), 44-2(18). 6.6(7), 9-20. 3. 7). 9JO&gt;. figs 
39-40. urmiar to early synthase languages and memory systems 
6 6(3-7), 8- Ml U. 9,3(3) 

Color. 3- 5-6(2), 6-114). 5m* mho Pigments 
Columbus, Christopher, 2,4(2) 

Comet. 5, 1,2(2) 

Complexion, in Galenic medicine, 8-5(2) 

Compound forms, m Voriuch script, 3-2(4), 4. 1 Ml. 4.1 1 — 4 &gt; 

4 4(3, 10}. 4-4 1(3), 3 2(3). Fig 18 
Computers, me of, 3.4(3). 4-1-3(41, 4.4(7 J. 6 MS) 6 411-3 
6T(l-4),6-8(2). 6.9(1-31 
Concordance- 4.4(10, 16), 6.1(8). 6 3(2) 

Comfmuro (Rcwcniaan Manifesto j, 8 9(2} 

Constellations. 3 3 4(4). 8,3(2). 8 4. 1 (2) 

Cont r a c eptive prescription,. 5.3(2) 

Copoc name of decans, 8 3(3), fig 3) 

Copy. Voynich man men pt as a, Z2,2( 51,3,3.1(5) 

Copying of VoTtuch era by students, 3 3 3(2), 6-1(8), 6-3(1 1 
Cotpms Hmrmmttcmm, 8.2 
Corrections in Vonudi text. 4.2( I ) 

Corrtspondetsces. tables of. 3 3-3(101, 3-34(1), 8-5(3). 8 7(1) 
Set mho Groupings of elements 
Cosmology, medieval, 3 2.3(1), 3 3 3(10), 3 -3-4(1 ), 8.5(5* 

Costume. 2,3(4 ), 2.4(3. 6). 3.3, 3(2). 8-1 H 1). figs IP. 3? 

Ctwer text, 2.2. 1(8). 44.2(5-6, 16), 5.1. 1(1) 

Cracow, vtut of Dee and Kelley to, 9 4.4(3) 

Craenuu. herbal of. 10(2-3} 

Crenelknooi, 3-3-3f2) 

"Cnbbtog/’ 3-2(2-3.51 

‘Cnba. ' 3. 2,3(2), 5-2(2), 34(3), 6. 1(7) 

Cnocai days. 3-3-5(21.8.3(3) 

Crowes. 3-34(9). 3 3-3(4) 

Gowns, 3. 3-3(2), 3.3-5(11.8.11(11 

CRT display- 5mm Cathode ray tube (CRT) display 

Crypunaiyoc approach to the Voynich manuscript. 4, 1.3(4). 

44fn-44.208), 5 3(2,4), 6, 5f 1 — 4X— 6.6f 1-7), 6 8(3) 
Cryptographic dertcei, curly, 8J(3), 8.7(1), 9.2(3), 9 4.4(6). 
figs 39-40 

Cryptograph? . history of. 2.Z MB), 9.2(1 -7) 

Cry**J, for lerying. 64 4( 1 K 9.4.4f 1 -6) 


134 


Currier, Preston, 12 H 2). 41 3&lt;4l. 4.4&lt;9h 4.4.2( I 3, 1 8 1 . 

u.UIk 6JU-2J.6.U 1-21.6,9(2-1 
CrcUmen, drawing resembling. 4. Jl 3* 

Grech language 2,30* 

Dalgarao. George, 6.6/41 9.2(7), 9 *30. 5) 

di Pistons, Leonardo. 8.2M I 

Data processing by computer!, 6.9( 1-3) 

Data reduction by computers. 6.9( 1-3) 

Daw of Voynich mioujcnpf: thirteenth eemurr, 2,10-1 6), 
2.2.1 11, V). 2.2.2(21. 2.4(1 k fourteenth cwwunr. 2,40); 
fifteenth century, 23* 4 1. 2,4(2). 7,30): uxteniih century, 
2.2. 1 (3). 2.2. 2(3). 2.30), 2.4(3-7). 33(2), 6.6(3), 7-30); 

luromarv o\ expert optrnon 2.4( 8 1.8(1) 

&lt;U Vinci. Uoninio. 2.401 
Da*. 3 33001 

Decani. 8 1(71.8 3(3). ft(E 31 

Dee, Arthur. 2. U81, 8.9(61 

Det. David, supoocd umt of Roger Bacon, 2.1(9) 

D«, John. 4.2(31, 6.2(2), 8.2(21. 64.4(2). 8 90-3), 9.2(3), 
9 .4.4(2, 6). Booi a/ EaocA. 9 4.4(3); commentation with 
ipno. 9 4.40-6 J; dunes. 8 90. 8). 9 4 40-6); Enochiar 
language, 8 4 4(2). 9.4 40-61, fijti 43-43; hieroglyphic 
manuscript m his possession. 2.1(8. 16). 8.4 4(2). 8 9(6-101; 
interfiled in Roger Bacon. 2,1(8-91. 2.2.1(31, 73(3). Librt 
My mr t mmm . 9 4.4(61; Momts HtttQfiypbtc* 89(3): ponatblv 
connected with Vormch manuscript, 2.1(8. 16). 2,2.20), 2.3(3). 
2.4(3), 333(6). 84,4(1); iptrirual mag* of. 8 4,4&lt; 1). 8.60). 
8.9(4. 8) . nuts go Europe. 2. 1(9), 89(5) 

De Huron* Sarptwm (Leonard Fuchs), I Of 1 0&gt; 

De Maneoun. Peter, 73(21 
De Manaco. Adam. 73(2) 
de' Medici. Coumu 8,201 

Demons ami. 8 43 0); names of. 8 3(2). 6,4,2(11. 8 4.30), 
6.601,9.2(3). 6; 33: pbmary- 8-4-M I) 

Descartes. Rene. 73(91 

Devmnagai i writing system. 9 4 101 

Diagrams. magtcal. See Images, magical 

Digestions, concept of, in Galenic medicine, 333(51, 8.5(21 

Digits. See Numerals 

Dioscoridei Anuarbeus. herbal of. 10(3,7. 10) 

Directions (of the compass 1. 33 3( 101. 33 4(41 
Disc, apher. 8 1(5), 9.2(3) 

Drwu CommrdM of Dana. 8. 1 (6) 

Dodoeru, Retnben. herbal of. 10(10) 

Dominion order, memory art of, 8 . H 4. 6) 

Doodles' ui Voynich manuscript drawings, 4.2(5-71 
Doubled ivmboli. 4.4. Kill 4.4,2(81 
Double-four ttnseture. 33,4(6) 

Dragon as alchemical symbol 8.6(6, 9) 

Drawings in Vtwiuch manuscript 2.1(2), 5-2U-2). 3 3 1(61 
3 4(1-3), figs 5-10, 13: architectonic forms. 3.2(3), 33, K 2-6. 
18). 33.5(2), 8.8(8); ajjrofogicil. 3.23(1. 7); comparison to 
other medieval manuscripts- 3-2(1, 5). 3-2.1(31 3-2.3(1—71, 
8 8(7-91. dooTtm of, 33; roamokpcaJ. 3,23(7): nqrclopedic 
quality, 3.2 Mt, 4. 7); herbal, 3-23(1). 3 3-IU-IOk idiomi- 
craoc and eruqoe character. 3,2(5); pharmaceutical. 33-1(2): 
' provincial' character. 3-2. 1(3). 3-23(3); symbolic nature. 

3-2(4). 3,2301, 33.2m. 3.4(3), 8,8(9). 6.9(51: itmmcm- 
cal forms, 3-2(4), 33 1(9). 8.8(8), nsaaJ impmuon on the 
modern reader. 3,2(1-51, 3,2,1(11 
Dudley. John (Duke of Northumberland), 2.1(8) 

Dumbarton Oaks. Garden Labrar? of, 10(3) 

Dummy characters. 4 4.2(5), 9 2(51. See aim Nulls 


Dummv ttn. 2.2.1 0, 81 , h-i.’iV lt» l.ln 1 S« •&gt;&lt;&gt;“ 0«ver 

text 

Eagle. figure of. 33. 1(71, 8.91 3 1 

Earth Mother, Roman privet to. 9 A 2(3) 

Easton. Stuart C. (hiKonani. 7.U21 
Eeiipwe, annular, 3 . 1 ,2(2 ) 

Egyptian characters. Ur Characters. Egyptian 
"Egyptian days' (in astrological medicine 1. 3 33(21 
Egypuan sidereal gods. 83(31 
Ekotenu, philosophical 5.3 3l 10), 33,4( 3. 'L 9 '3* 

Elements, scenic, in place memorv ivitero. 8 1 1 2 1 
EUuf of life, 2,2.1(41. 33 5(6). 5,4(21 
Embellished characters . LU21 4, l 4t 1-3). tig- 2u 
Encyclopedic works. medieval. 2,1(2). 5,2,31 7 L 3-4l 1 1 
Ending ion. 4 4(9) 

Endings. Ur Affixes, grammatical 

England, as origin of Vovruch manuscript. 23 1 ( —3* 

English language. 2 3(2-51 53(2- 4* 

Enochi an language. 5## Language. Enochian 
Entropy. statistics i measure of. o, 7 ( 5— *J 
Equations' seen bv Brumbaugh 4.317 1 
Erasures in Voviuch text. 4.2/ 1 1 
Exell, A. W., 4.1.2(11 

Eapcnmental science ol Roger Baton W Bacon. Roger Experi- 
mental Science ot 

Extraneous scripts in Voynich teat .See Scripts, eitrancuu*. in 
Voynich text 

Fabncaoon, Voinich manuscript as ft deliberate. 2,2. HI -8 1 

34(21,5.4(1,7) 

Facts in lkhetn* drawings. 8 8(9l fig 36, in Vovmch manuscript 
drawings. }J jf7-8K 53 3(5-7, 9). 3 3 4(2, 4. 121, 3 $ 
fig 9 

Fallopian tubes, 3, 1,2(2) 

Fsms ( Roucrucian Manifesto l 8.9(2 1 
Farnese iamilv r 2 11 1 4 1 

Fedy. Martin. 2.23(5). 23Uk 4.L2i2k 5-2U-5i. 5 3ili. 

6.1(21 6.2/ h. 6.7il;. fig 25 
Fertility, 5 3 3( I 1 

Fiber- like forms. 33.4(101. 33 -6(21 
Fibonacci. Leonardo. 6 10(5 1 
Fiano. Manila. 8. 1(1-2) 

Filler text. See Dummv teat 

First matter, concept of, in alchemy. 8.8( 5 ) 

Firff Vovnich man usenp smdv group. 4. 13(4 1 6 2i l-5i 

Fixed nars. 83(21 fig. 29 

Fla me, like forms. 3-2.3f5l 3 3 3(71 

Flemming, Dr. G. M-J,. 23(7) 

Flowers. 33- If 1. 91 
Foam-like forms. 33,4(7,91.8.5(51 
Folio gatherings. 4.2(91 fig 22 
Folio numbering. 4,2f 101 

Folios astrological 3-23(7), 3 3-2(2). 3-3-3M-3). 6 3l 2l, 7 
8.3f 1. 31; agronomical. 3.3,3(4-10). 3.3.4(1-13). 8 3(1. 3*. 
raamofogieil- 333(4), )3 4f 1-13), 3 3-6(2), 83(L 3*, 
featuring human figures (folios 75-64), 33.2(21, 33.5(1-61. 
5. 1.2(2), 7.4(3). 8-6(9); herbal Urr Folios, plant): meteor- 
olofical (if* Folios, coamotogical) : pharmaceutical, 33.1/2-3). 
3 3.2(1 *2), 33-5(51, 5,4(1, 5L IO£U; plam. 33-in-lOi 
33,2(1), 33,5(51, 63(2), 6.6lB), 6.8(2). 8.8(8), 101 !*, 
star, paragraph (fohos 103-116). 33-7fU, See mho Folios, dis- 
cuiuon of individual 

Folios, discuiuon of individual: lr, 1,1(21. 4.2(21, 4.3/21. 

5 4(21; 2r, 33,1(91; 3r, 33.1(91; 3v, 333(41. 5r. 3 3 H9i. 


135 


or. 33 1* 91. 53 U}k Ur. 3333. 9u iU. 53-13. o» t 

I3r 5 3.H3 g lyv. 5,3 Ii9k Nr. J 3 119*. Nv. 3 J.liQi, 
Hr. 3 3H3K L6t JAllJi; IT*. 4_23&gt;- 5 4i2). 22i* 
33 119 k 22*. 3*3* t (4 9 k 23r. 33.U3I: 25v. 3.3.1(71; 27v, 
33-1(31; 28r, 3 3 HSh 29r. 3 3 119); 33 k 33 H7); 33*. 
33-1(31; 35v* 3.3*1(91; 37v. 53.1(3); 3§r. 33.H8); 4Qr, 
3.34(91; 4ir. 3 34(91; 41*. 3-2(31; 34 1(31; 44*. 344(31; 
45r, 3 34(3* 41; 43*. 3 3.1(3* 4. 9); 46* 3 3.1(7); 49r, 
3*2(31. 3.34(81; 49*. 43/3). 54(21; 53r. 3-34141; 54*. 
3-34(41; 33*. 334(7): 36*. 3.3419); 57*. 3.34(31. 

44 4(11. 4.3(41* 3 4121; 65r 3 54(41; 06r 23(6). 3 3 71H. 
4.2(41, 4.3&lt;3 1; 66* 3 3 4(111. 4.2(5-61, 67rl. 3-34(31* 
3*3 3(5 1- 67r2. 3-3- H 3. 6&gt;; 67*1. 34.3(51: 67*2. 34 4(31. 
844(2). 9.44(2) : 68rl, 33-3(7); 68r2. 3 3 3(71; 68r3. 
3 3-3(9-101; 68*1. 3.34(3); 3-3.3(71: 68*2. 3.3 1(3). 

3.3.3(8-91: 68*3, 3-3-4(61, 5.2(4); 69r. 3-3 4(81* 4.3(6); 
69v. 3 3*4(8). 70r 1, 3*3 4/7), 70r2. 3-3.4(121. 4.211); 70*1. 
3 3 3(31; Tlr. 3-3 3(3): 71*. 3*33(31; 72rl. 3 3 3(31; n r . 
3-34(41, 3.3 5(3-41; 73*. 3 3.5(4); 76r. 4.3(7), 5.4(2); 78r. 
33-5(4). 5.2(5-41; 79v, 333(2. 4): 82*. 3.3 5(3). 83** 
5 5 5(2); 8V-g6r3 to r4 and vl to *2 4 large mu It) pi v- folded 
vfrroi 2.4)6). ; )(2f, 3 3 4(2), 33.64-31. 0 1(5); 85-86v3. 
33-4401. 4 24-61 05-86*4, 3-3-4191; B7r. 4.2(7); 88r. 

3 3 113k 89rl. 3 3.1(7); 89v(, 33.1(7); 90rl. 333(2); 
90r2, 33 M9): 90v(. 33 1(9); 93r. 2.1(21. 3*33(2); 9%. 
3K2) 33.2(21; 99*. 3-3.1(71; iOOf, 3*33(2-3); 10 If. 
3 3.1(31. 101*. 2.1(21, 33-1(21; 101*2. 3 l(2&gt;* 33312); 
116*. 1 1(21.23(6). 3.3.711). 4.2(81. 5.1(11.5,4(2, 5) 

Forgery. Vovmch manuscript mi a. 2.2- 1 ( 1-8), 3 4(21. &gt;,4( 1.7) 

Faun ittu of four dements]. 3331 10) 

France, mi tourer of Voynich manuscript, 23(31 
Franciscan order. 5.12(3). 7.H 11, 7 311, 31* 74(21, 8.H5I 
Frankowska. Malgorcan ion Roger Baton as scientist J* 73(7-91 
Frederic V. Elmer Palatine, 8 9(3» 

Freemasons, 8.1 l 

French Untuaie in the Vovnich manuscript, 23 1 3 ) 

Frequencies. 4 1 3(41. 4.413-4* 9), 4A2U0K 6,118). 6.2(3-41, 
6.7(21.6*811).% 28 
Frequence counts iee Frequencies 

Friedman. EUiebeth. 2.2.11 2, 3-6). 230 h 2.4 i3k 3, lilt, 
3 2312). 3 3 E ( I K 3.4(11; on attempts to break the cipher. 
4*411-8), 4.4.2U. 8, 101. 5.2( U, 53(4). 6*2(5 J* 6 4(1). 
6.5(2), 6*7131 

Friedman. William F*. 12 1(6), 5*23(2), 4*4*111), 53*2(6), 
6.1(2), 6.2U-5), 6.3(3). 64U). 6,5i 1-4). 6.6(1, 3-4). 
6.8(1); on anagrams, 6.5(3-41; on synthetic languages, 
6.5(2-41. 6-6(3-41. 9*2(7). 93(5) 

Fneaman CoJ lection. 63(3) 

Froth. See Foam-like forms 
Fruits. 3 3 1(5.91.3 3 5(2-3) 

Fuchs. Leonhard, botanical wood cues of. 10(10) 

Galen. See Medicine. Galenic 
Gemauu, concept in Cabala. 8.71 1 ) 

Gemini . Zodiac ugn of. 2 At 3 i . fig 10 
Gerard. John, herbal of* 10( 10) 

German language, 2.3(3. 6), 4.2(4). 4 4(5). 5-4(51. 9 43( 1) 
German* aa source of Vonuch manusa-ipc 23(3* 5J 
Gibon. Etienne, 2. 2-2(2), 5.1.213- 5) 

Giordamiu. 8.1(7) 

Gknsolaiia, 9 4(11.9 43(11 
Gnostic philosophy* 8.6(3) 

Gold, m alchemy. 8-4.41 h. 8,81 3. 5), 8.916). 9.4.4(2) 

Golden Dawn. Roucrucian Order of. 8 4,2( 1 1. 9.4.4161 


Gospels, animal jwnboijof fht four, 3 23*-*' 

Gut Ou Sts le, 2 «IN), ? 2* I I 3 )* 5 2 3* 6 I 
Graphic computer dnpUr** 3-4i 5 K 6*"i 2l 
Greek characters. 4,21 3— 41- 5 *h4| 

Greek language. 4.4(5 1. 5 U 1 1. 5*2(4). 8-14 ID). 9,-t*2t2i 
Greek shorrhand, 5*1*21 i, 61* 9. 1( I ) 

Grosseteste. Robert (Bishop 1 . 7.3(21 

Grouping of dements in utrakgr, 63(2-3), fig* 29-3*. in 
cabala* 8,3(2), 8*7(11. %. 35; in medieval cosmoloev. 

3*33(101* 5*3 4(1). 8.5(5), figs. 14* 34; m Vumuch manuscript 
drawings, 33*41 7 K 53-3161. tip. 11- L 5 
Guardian umrei. 8*43)2) 

Gunpowder. Racer Bacon s recipe Kir. l Ufi' 

Gush of Liquid See Liquid: Spout -like terms 

Gvnecologv as (Opic of Voynich manuscript. 5.L2i2*. 5. 2m, 
53(2-3) 

Habiburg. House of. 8.9( 3 1 
Hal* Abbas, 8 5(1) 

Hal* ben Rod wan, 8.51 1 ) 

Hand analysis of Vovruch teat. O. U 8 1 * GG( 1 - 2t* 6 *H &gt; i 
Hands in the Vovruch manuscript. -i*2i 1L 4 All 1 v *' 8&lt; 1-2- 
6,9(2* 

Harvard Univeraiiy. 2*41 7 » 

Hats, 2*4(3), 333(21* 8. 1 1 111. figs. 10* V 
Heat, therapeutic* 33-515 I, 8.5i4) 

Hebrew characters. 5*111 ) B.4.2UL 8.43(1). K-Tt i-Zl. 9.-*. 1th. 
9A243) 

Hdianthui* 2.4(2) 

HeJJemioc philosophy. 8*2( ) 1. 8*4* 1( 1 ) 

Heraldic devices. 333(21 

HerbaU, 3*23(1-2), 3 3 1(1-9). 6,6(8), 101 l-lll 
Htrb*TiMtm Friar Etcowts I herbal of Ouo Brunttht. IQ) U)&gt; 

Herbs, medicinal. 83(2-3. 5) 10(1-11 pammi 
Hermes Trumegwus. 8*2(21* 8.81 2). 9,4. It l f 
Hermetic tradition, 83M).8 4,4i]l, H.9i 2- 4 )* 9 m. h 1 
Hcrmetica, 8 2l l— It 

Hierogivphic manuscript in poucision of John Dee, 2. 1* 8 Usi 
8 4.4(21, 8 916-10) 

Hieroglyphs. 4 4*2(91* fi.4.1 (1). 9*2(7 1 

Hiidcgardr of Bingen. Saint. 2.4( I ), 3*2 3*1. 5-"). 6*33)* 
943(1-2) % 43 
Hippocrates* 8.4, l (U. 8.5(11 

HutoncaJ importance of Votiuch manuscript. 2,2* 1 1 b-b &gt; 

Kama. Vovmch manuscript: as a. 2*2. 1( 1-8) 

Holm (bocanuti, 33* K H 
Hooke. Robert. 9 4*4(6) 

Horoscopes. 3*33(2) 

Hom culture, am topic of Vopvnjch manuscript, 333(31 
Houghton Rare Book Library. Harvard Umvenits* 2.41 7 1 
Houses, astor logical, 6*3(2) 

Human Faces: in alchemy drawing. 8*8(9). % 36* on geometrical 
figures, 3 3-6(23; m plant fobos. 33.1(7-81. fig 9, on sun and 
moon. 3.33(5-7,9) 33.4(2. 4, 12) 

Human figures' in alchemy drawing. 8,8(9). fig. 36, in Anglo-Saxon 
herbal. 33-4(3); in anroiogical manuscripts. 3*23(7); of 
Opoaai dt Cuunru. 3*23(31: of Saint Hiidegarde* 3*23(5-61. 
in Votmch mantuCTipt. 3-2.316 J. 33-1(4). 3-3*5 12-3&gt;. 
33.4(2. 5. 9-10). 3*3.511-6), 33.7(1). 4*2(4), 8 313). figs 
10* 15, 37 

Humanist script* 2.4(7) 

Humors (concept in Gaksuc medicinei, 3331 10)* 3 3 4i2-3. 6). " 
33.5f3-4),8 5ll) 

Hrk (concept in akhetnv)* 8.8(5) 


136 


Hvpothesei. crvpunalvtic, 4 4 2- l-lfe 6 " 4 t&gt;9‘ !-'■ 

Hypothesis searching. 6.91 1 * 

Hypothesis testing. O.yi U2i 

Ideographic writing ivskru. 4 12(l&gt;, 4.42(3, 9). 92(5). 92(7). 
93(11 

Igaou Lmgu ( of Sami Hiktepardc). 9 4,3 d ). fig 43 

Illumination. divine. symbols of. 333(4)- 8 8(9i 

In ugn: *tral. 8 4.1(2); magical. 8 4(1), 8.42(1-2}. 8 4.2(13. 

8.4. 3( t L £.6(1). 8 9(3), 9.4 U I &gt; fig. 32: planetary. 8.41(2) 
Incantations. 8.4 HI I. 8.42( I 1. 9.4( l ). 9.4 It h. 9 42(2} 

Index of words, 4 4f 9), 6 I (8). 6,3(2). 6.4(2) 

' Indian characters. 8,4. 1 (1 ). 9.4, 1 r i ). fig 4 L 
Infixed characters. 4 . L 3 ( 2 - 3 1 - 4 . t 4 l 1 p. fig 18 

lulu. LI (2), 2-3(11. 2.4(11, 32(21* 3.2JU-3I. 42.1(1 9. ill 
Italian Language in Voynich manuso-ipt. 23(3^1), 2.4(3). 

4.401 

Italian wvie. 2.3(4), 32. Hi I . 4. l.Ml I 

leak u source of Voriuch manuicript, 2.313-4*. 2.4(3 1. 3 2.1(3). 
4,1. 1 ( ll. 4.401 

Jin. phartraceutical, 32(2), 3 31(2). 3.3. 2(2 v, 3 3-6&lt; 2) 

Jets of vapr r ire Spout -like forms 
Johnston i synthetic language of). 6 601 

Joseph us. 8.42(1 I 
Juliana Amaa Codex. 1013] 

KeiW. Edmund. £ 4.4(1). H.9( I -10:. 9,4.41 1-6) 

Kent, Roland G.. 3- IU) 

'Keys' in Vuvnich manuscript. 2.2,1(31. 32.3(2). 3.3- 3(3). 

4 2(8]. 4.3( 1-6), 5.4(2), figs. 23-24 
Khowarazmi, A l - , 8. 1 0( 1 ) 

Kipling. Rudvard, 7.3(4) 

Kircher. Athanasius. 1.1(3. 6). 1.2(4 L 2,1(11*15), 6.2(2). 

9.2(3 t 

Kraus. Hans P . LIU). 12(71.3.4(11.6-1111 
Knacher. Jeffrey, 2.4(7 1 , 4.1. M4 1,6.1121* 6.7( L-4j 
K statistic. 0 7(4) 

Labels on Vuvnich manuscript drawings, 3.1(2). 3.2.513-4. Gj. 
3 3-2(2), 3.3 3(7). 4.4,1: 161,4*4. 2l 1 1 i. 52f3*. 54i3* 

Lacmmfm. 1 0(7] 

Language. Enochian. 6.4, 4(2), 9.4.4( 1-6). figs. 43-45 
Language underlying Vovmch text. 2.311-3), 4.4(5l, 3. 2(2-3), 
3.3(2—41, 5.4(6), 6.5(4), 6.6(3-71. 6.7(3) 

Languages: artificial, 422(2), 4 42(3, 17), 5 4(6), 6.2(3), 
6.5(4), 6.6(3— 7), 8.1(8, 10), 8.44(2), 9( 1 )-9.4.4(6); 
ter national. 6.5(4), 9-2(7). 9 3(1-5), 9,4(U; magical, 

9.4(1), 9.4(1 -3 L mnaeal (religious). 9.3(5), 9.4(1), 

9.4 3(1-2). 9,4,4 f 1-6K figi- 43-45. natural. 4.42(3. 8, lOL 
6.7( 3—4); ivniheuc Utt Languages. amFiaali: universal, 

6,5(4). 6.6(5-71.92(7)- 9.3H-5L9,4H) 

Liskv. Count, 9.4 4(3t 

Latin language. 3.3.41 3). 5. 2(1-5), 5.4(4V, 6.2(2), 6.7(4). 
9.2(6 K 9,3(1. 5L 9,42(1-3). 9.43(1); underlying Voynich 
tew. 2 3(1. 3), 4,4(5), 44.2(3. &amp; 14-17). 3. LIU). 3.4(6. 
81: ai used bv Roger Bacon. 3,2U-2). 7.4(31 
Latin text cipher of Nrwbold, 3.1(2). 51.1(1) 

Leaves (of piano). 3-3. 1(1, 3, 9), 3.3,2( 1 1 
L**&lt;h Book of B*U. 10(7) 

Lehmann -H au pt, Hellmui, 2, 3(4), 2.4(2) 

Leibniz. 8. 1(8). 9.3(2) 

Leo. Zodiac sign of. fig, 10 

Lf*rr Ab*ct i of Leonardo Fibonacci], B 10(3) 

Libra. Zodiac sign of. fig. 10 


Li**n ,11 \jt*riornm i of jLihn Dr* r 't ^ i ■ (i 

Ltcitum in Vmnich script . h.M it ; ■! ^ 2* 

fig 18 

Ugn-aJoes. 3.3 5i 5 i 

Lion, figure of, 3 3 1(7 j, H 8icn. 8 9i 3 i 
Liquid. 3. 3-5(3)- 3.2(31,8,8(9] 

Looped characters, 4. 1 .Jf 2 ), 4, 1.4U . 3 1 
Lull. Ramon, 6,3(3). 8.1(3 L 9,2(3 1 

Macrocosm. 3-3-41 3). 8-5(2) 

Magic. 3 3 3*3). 54(6). 8,4i H. SihU2 s .-*2 1, 

8.4.3i 1 — \K HA 4i I-2 j, B.Ol 1 1, h 9i 2, N— 1 1 1 - . l-o- 

Magic squares. B,4.3i I f, b ~M 1. fig 32 
Magnifying glass. 5, L2l 1 1. 52m 
Magyar, as language of Vovnich manuscript. 23 f 5 . 

Mandrake. 332(B) 

Manifestoes. Rosicrudan. B 9f 2l 

Manly. John M . 2.1 ( 15l. 2.2.2 l2-5j. 5 1 2m. u-~\ 0 5- 1 1 
Mansions of the moon. 8, 1 (7 ), 8 3f 2) . fig si) 

Manuscripts, medieval alchemical. 3.2 3' It. 1 H,2m* 

54 1 1-21* 3-4f 3. 61, T3i3t, ~4«3&gt; s uc -1 "-*&gt;■. ♦) M 1 

10J ill, astrological, a 3t 1 ► 

Maps, 3-2. 3f 3-4 1, 3.3.4i b. H i. 3 5 o&lt; 2&gt;. 

Marci. Joannus Marcus. 1 ! f 4—4. 01. Li!?— 4 . 2.1'L L Ll- 

12, I3i, figs 2-3 

Markovian analysis. 6,71 4 1 
Materia medica. 10U-2) 

Mathers, S L MacGregor, 8 4.2( 1 ) 

Mama, cipher. 5 .4(3-5. 7-8). 9 4. 4(3-6) 

Meaning of she Vovnich manuscript. 2.1(2). 2,2- HI -8 f* 

2.2. 2( I. 5), 3-3.6(2), 3.4H-2). 52(4). 5. 3(2-31, 

8.8(7) 

Meaningless. Vovnich manusaipt considered as. 22.1 ( l-8&gt; 

Medical month . 8 5(4) 

Medicine. Arabic" tradition of, 8.5 1 1 j 

Medicine, Galenic, 3 3 3(3 I0&gt;. 3 3 4H , 3?^r5*. 

8,5( 1-5 j. 8.8i 3. 5 ), fig. 34 
Memorv an. 8 Ul-1 1 1. B.bi L ), 9 3t2, T I 
Memory images. 8 , 1(2. 4, "6-7 j, B.5i3&gt; 

Memorv places"' , S L 1 2-3 ) 

Microcosm. 3, 3. 4(3). 8,5(2) 

Microscope- 2.2-2(31. 5 1,2(3). 7 3(4 i 

MimucuJe characters. 4.Ll( 11 

Mirror vnong of Leonardo da Vinci. 2,4f 5 1 

Miuerone. Diocuuits. 2. 1(15 1 

Miusowmes, navels of. 42. 3( I J. 8.10( 2). 9 31 1 1 

Miuowsky.Dr Raphael. 1.1(7), 2. U 121 

M oemoruc inteim. 8. il 1-11), 8.6f H. 93(2. 71 

Mohammeduu. See Arabic influence On medieval cosmology 

Moisture. 33-4(7}- 33-5(3), 8.5(4) 

Momms Hitroglyphtu t (of John Dee), 8.914-5) 

Maodrigofte. Villa, 1*1(10), 1.2(51, 221 151 

Monetary valuauon of Vovnich manuscript. LU7h L2(~-8I. 
2.1(9. 131 

Monographic frepueticv counts See Frequencies 

Months. 3-33(1, 31, 42(11). 8.5(41 

Moon. 3-33(4-7. 9- 10L 3-3 4(4. 9}. 8.5(4). 8.8f9) 

Musitei). 2.3(6). 42(4) 

Mvsocum. Christian. 32.3(1. 3-7). 8,8(33. 8 9(2 1 


hUfarrafij Huton* of Plmv the Elder. 10(4) 
Neotogisnu. 9.4(1 1 
New World plum. 2.4(2) 


13 ? 


New bold. William R, 2.2 ,1(U 2.2.21 1, *1. 230 K 2 4m. 
3 3-4(6). 4.4.202), 50). 3. Ill), 5,1. UlL 3. 1.2(7). 5 2.m. 
6. HlK 6.20 K 6-50 1. 6.7(1), 73(4) 

Night, 33. 300) 

Nill, A. M.. 2.414), 4.20) 

Nomcnciator, 9.2(5K 9313) 

Nnw A rmo f c lc (ihvihiadiyitRi)). 9.10). fig. 3B 
Notary in. 4A2(6K 0.60) 

Nulls. 4 4.2(5, 14-15, IT). 9 2(3-6) 

Numbers, magical significance of, 33.40) 

Numbers of dements. Je# Group* ng of elements 

Numeral forms, early, 2.4(6). 4.L2UK 4.13(3). 54(4-5. 

7-8i. 8, 1014), 9.U1K9.13I2K 9.2(3) 

Numerals; m abbreviation interns. 9,10): in early codes- 9.2(6). 
93(3); Hindu -Arabic. 4_L2(1), 4.130. 3). 8.100^0. 

9.2(6); mixtures of Arabic and Roman. 8.10(4), 9.2(6); under * 
lying Voynidi symbols. 4.1.20 K 4. 13(3). 5.4(4-8) 

"Occulta (precious medical substances), 333(5) 

Old English a* language of Voynich manuscript. 23(2), 53(2-4) 
Old High German. Srr German Language 
Old Imh. 9 4,2(2) 

O Neill. Hugh (boo mst). 2312-3). 33.10-2). 5.30). 5.4(1) 

Qp*t Mmjmi of Roger Bacon 5« Bacon. Roger, works of 
Order of the Garter. 8.91 3 ) 

Order of symbols in Voynich script words", 4,4(10). 4,4. 1( 6), 
4, 4.2(9. 17). 6&lt;6( 1-2), B.H 1 1 ). 9.2(7), 9.3(5), fig. 27 
Ova. 5. 1.2(2). 5.2(3) 

Owes: 5.2(3) 

Oxford. University of. 7(2) 

Pimphilius. herbal of. 1014) 

Pinohkr. Erwin, 2,2.1 (2), 2.2.2.(3, 5), 23(6). 2.4(3), 3.20(3), 
3.2.30 i. 33 5(6). 3-40) - 

Papal correspondence, use of ciphers in. 9, 2(5 J , 9 3(5 ) , fig 39 
Paracelsus, medical doctrines of. 33.5(6) 

Parchment. 23( 1 ). 2.4( 1 1 
Paris, University of 7.20 1 
Parma. 2.1041 

Pastgraphv. 63(4). 6.6f 3-7), 9,2(7). 930-3), 9.40) 

Fatter ns I of Letters in wordsJ . 4.4 21 101.5-4(5) 

PDP-l computer, 6.7(2) 

Pepper plant, 2.4(2), 33.1(2) 

P***Dt±x*a*( herbal). 10(7) 

Petersen. Theodore C., 2.20(4). 2.401, 3.23, 33.10-2), 
333(2). 33.60). 3.4(2), 4.1.212). 4.20-2), 4 4.09). 
6.1(2). 6.2(2). 63. 83(3) 

Pharmaceutical iari. See jars, pharmaceutical 
Phlebotomy, 83(31 

Photocopies of Voenich manuscript. 3.2ft). 3.2.2(11. 3.3ft). 

3-3.212). 3.3.317). 3.1.6(1-21.6.1(2-8) 
ftwm. 3-3 4(4), 3 3 6(3). 6.3(3), 8.3(3). 8.4(1). 8 4,1(1). 

8.4.2(11. 8.6(1). 9.4.1(1-21 
PiCodelU Mirandoia, Giovanni. 8 , 2 ( 2 ) 

Pigments. 2.1(2), 3.2.20) 

Ft minder, 8.2(4-51 

Pipe-like forms. 3 30(4), 33.2(2), 3.3 40. 8). 33.3(2-3, 6). 
3 3.6(2). 5.2(3) 

Pisces. Zodiac sign of. 4,20 1). fig to 
Pittman shorthand system. 9.13(1) 

Place memory svsrem. 8 I ( 2-3, 6) 

Plaintext. 4,4.21 2. 4-5 ) 

PLirwa, 8.1( 7) 

Plant idcati fitauom. 3 3 ■ l (1 -2 ) , 5 .4(1 ) . 6 3(2) 


Platforms. 33,1(3), 3 3 5(2) 

Platonism. 8.2f l ). 8.8(3 ) 

Pleiades. 33300) 

Pliny the Elder. 10(4) 

Pod -like forms. 33-5(2-3) 

Poland- visited by Dee and Kelley. 9 4 4(3) 

Polish language in Voynich manuscript. 23(5) 

Porta, Giovanru Battuta, 5.3(1). 8.2(2). 9-2(3) 

Prague, 1.1(3), 2.1( 15), 2.2, 1(7), 2.3(5). 2.4(5), B.9( 10) 

Prayers- See Incincaooni: Languages, mystical; Spells 
Precedence structure in Voynich teat 'words". 6.611 -2 V See itiio 
Beginning - middle end nructure of Vovnieh text words 
Prefixed elements. 4.4. 1 03), 4.4.2(91 
Pmcnpoom. medial, 33*2(21, 33.7( 1 1 
Proper Lies, natural, in Galenic medicine, 33 4(3. 7) 

Provenience of mao user tpt; Continental Europe, 23(3), 80): 
England. 2,3(1); France, 23(3); Germany, 23(3. 5). hah, 
23(3-4) 

Pseudo* Aristotle, 33 5(51 
Ptolemy. 83(2) 

Puffs of vapor. Ut Spout -Like forms 
Pulpit - Kike forms. 33.5(2, 6j 
Pythagoras. 33 4f I I 

Qualities, natural, 8,5( 2 ) . 8 8&lt; 5 ) 

Quintilian. 8.1(3. 9J 

Radio Corporation of America. 6.40, 3&gt; 

Ram. 33 4001 
Rainbows. 3 3 3(3) 

Ram, figure of. 2.2-2(51. 333(3), fig 10 
Raphael, Dr., Mf?K 20(12) 

Rav-like forms. 3.23(51. 333(5, 7-Bk 33 40. 8. I2&gt;. 

3 3 5(41,33,6 (2&gt; 

RCA. Srr Radio Corporation of America 
Real Character. 9.2f 7 ). 930 . 4 ) 

Reformation, destruction of Religious Houses d urine, 2 l 
Renaissance style. 2.4( 1 . 31, 3 .2. 1 ( 3 I 
Repeating sequence. 4 l .40 ). 4 3(3-4) 

Repetition of words. 4 4(2-3. 6 - 8 1 , 4.4.|ifnJ, 4 4.2(8. 10-11, 
161,9 4.2(21 

Reverse alphabetic sort. 4.4(9) 

Rham.fi.5fU 
Rhtiocomists, 10(2) 

Ripley. George ( alchemist 1. 8.8(9) 

Robes, 8.110). figs 10. 3? 

Roman minuscule characters. 4 . 1 . 1 ( 1 j 
Roman numerals. 6-6(1 ). 8.10(4) 

Root crowns, 33.1(3,9) 

Roots, grammatical, 4 4.2(1 7), 6.6(2), 6 8(2). 93(5) 

Roots, plant. 33.1(1. 3-4. 7K 33.20 1, 333(2-3), 8.8(fii 
Rose, 8.9(3) 

Rosetta stone. 3.23(2) 

Routrucum Brotherhood, 8.1(7), 8.4.2(11, 84.4(2), 8.90-5;, 
8.9(3. 5) 

Roughneu, 4.4(4), 4.4.2(101 
Royal Society, 9 4 4(6) 

Rudolph IL 1. 1(4-5, 7-81, 1,2(1K 2.1(1, 4. 9. UK 2.2.U3. 7), 
22.2(5 J. 24f6|. 34(2), 4.200), 43(2), 5 4(2). 89(5, 10). 
9.4,20). 94.4(31 

Sagittarius. Zodit sign of. 2.3(4), 2.4(6 1, fig 10 
Salomon. Richard. 23(6). 3-23(3 L 4.2(4) 

Sample, text, 6.4(2). 6.7(2. 4). 6.9(2? 


135 


Sap. plant, 3 3 5t 5 1 
Saturn. 3.3 4(41 

Scalloped forms, 3-3.4(2*3,9-10) 

Schizophrenics. Unguifc of. 9 4f l ) 

SchoUut method. 7.1(2, Si 
Scholastic philosophers. 7*1(21,7*5(0 

Script alphabetic, 4,1*2(11; humanist. 2.4(7 f: •deqgrxpfuc* 

41.2(1], 4. 4, 2(3. 9)* 9,1(31* 9,2(71; 9 30); wllabic, 

4.1.2(21 $*t*ko Script, V oriuch 

Script* Voynich. 3 4(31. 4.1(11* compound structure of, 3*2(4)* 
3 4(3). 4.l( 1-2), 4.1*3(1-41* 4 4.1(31* -5.2(3). fig 18. kgi«f» 
m* 4*1(11, 4*1*30. 3-4), 4 4001, 4.4.1(31, fig IS: relation* 
ship to known alphabets. 4*1.20), style of. 3-2(4). 3 4(3), 
4. U (1*4.1.4(2-31 

Scripts* extraneous, in Vovnich text, 1.1(2)* 3.3.30- 31* 3 3-40 U, 
4.20-1 U. 4-3(2). 6, 1 (7)* figs* 10. 21-23 
Smmg* 8.4.4(0,94*4(1-6) 

Scab, magical Set Images, magical 
Seances 9.4*4( 1-6) 

Seasons, 3-3-300), 3-3 412. 4, 61, 8*5(21 

Second Vorruch Manuscript Stud* Group. 40-3(4). 6.4( 1-31 

Seed podi. -3 5(2-31 

Sephiroth. 8.1(61.8.3(21* 8.7(11 

Sequence, repeating, 4.1 4(1). 4 3(3-4) 

Sequences* alpha bene. 4-2(2), 4 3(2) 

Shakespeare* 9. J(4i 

Shorthand. 4-4,214. 6), 3.1*21 L 6i. 8 6i I )* 9.10-41* 9.1 3(2)* 
9 4*2( l )* fig 38 

Shorthand Gphrr" of NrwboLd, 3. 1 (2). 3. 1*2(1 ) 

Sidereal Gods* Egyptian* 8.3(3) 

Si lister* Jakob. 9.2(3, 6-71 

Simotudes of Ceos* mnemonic iriteth of, 8 1 ( 1-2) 

Singer. Charles. 2,2*20, 3). 2.3f 3-6). 2 4(3). 3.2.1(21* 3.33(6* 
Snow, 3 3 4001 

Solomon; kft of. 8*4*20); magical in* cm of 8.40). 8 4*2(0* 
8.60). seal of, 8 4*20 1 
Spagmc school of meoicine. 3 3 3(6) 

Speaking rn longues 9 40)* 9 4.30 &gt; 

Spells* 33.4(3-4), 8.4 M 0*9 40). 9 4.2(2-31* 10(7) 

Spermatozoa. 3,1. 2(2)* 3.3(2) 

Spiral nebula . 3 3.4(6), 3. 1.2(2) 

Spirits, 8,4.20). 8-4.30-31, 8 4.40-2). 8.6(0, 8.9(4* 8)* 
9.4(0* 9.4-40-6); familiar, 8.4. 3(3) $** she Angels; Demons 
Spout- Like forms. 3.3 4(2-4, 7* 10-10* 3 3 3(3). 8.8(9) 

Sprat See Spout-like forms 

Star- figures 3 3 4(4), 3 3.6(3&gt;. 8 4.1(2). 9 AM 1-2). figs 41—42 
'Star-maps 3.4(09) 

Scar names. 8*3(2). fig 29 
Star - paragraphs, 3. 3,7(0 

Stir -pactum, 3*3 4(41. 3 3,6(3)* 8.4 1(2). 94*10-2). figs 41-42 
Scar-reoprv 3.3*70) 

Stan. 3*3,3(4-10). 3-3 4(0 3. 6-8), 3 3 3(6). 3.3*6(21. 3.3 7(0* 
3 4(0*4*3(6), 8.3(2), fig. 29 
Stations of ibe Cross* 8. M 3) 

Stations of the moon, B* I f7&gt;. 8*3(2)* fig 3D 
Steele* Robert. 2. M 161. 2.3(4), 2 40). 3*2* It 5)* 7*3(6) 
Steganopraphf See Grrptqgripht. hi wort of: Shorthand 
Stems, grammatical* 4. 4,2(17). 6 6(2). 6.8(2), 9.3(3) 

Strms* plant. 3-3- 1 ( 0 3, 7. 9). 3 3.3(2-3) 

Stenographic (shorthand system of John WiUu), 9. 1,3(0* fig 
38 

Stroke, horizontal. 4. 1-3(2) 

Strokes m ideographic charterers. 4.1 3(0 
Strom berg -Carlson 4020, 6.7(21 


Strong, Leonell C, 2.2,1(51. 2.2*2 i4-5i. 2 3i2-. 2^5*. 3.1% 
3 30 -4)* 6. 1(2). 6.2(0* 6,71 1 1 

Sfirie of Voynich manuvcTips dia wings. 2.1(2), 3,2(1 -2). 5.2.1. 
3.3- H6), figs 5-10, 15; architectonic, 3. 2(3-4), 3 3, 1(2-3, 
6. 8). 3 3 5(2)* 8.8(8), idiosyncratic. 3,2(5). jvmboUt. 

3.2(4), 3*2.3(51*3 3*2(0* 3 4(3). 8 8(9). 8 9(5) 

Stele of Voynich icnpt, 3.2(4). 3 4(31. 4. H 1 1. 4.1,4i2-3) 

Stvlisuc attacks on Vorruch teat, 4.4( l- JO) 

SrvkmatuEicaJ techniques. 6 7( 1-3) 

Subject categories* 8 U 10)* 9,3(3) 

Subject. vf method of Newbold. 6.51 1 ) 

Substitution* 4, 1*2(1). 44(4-5)* 4 4.2(2, 4. 5-0, 8 It) In 
3,11(1). 3.212. 4), 3.4(2)* 6.6(3* 6). 9*2(1 * 3) 

Suffixes* 6.8t 1 1. Jee *£to Affixes* grammatical 
Sufism. 8.1(51* 9 4. 3(2) 

Sun. 3*3. 3(4-5. 7-8. 101, 3 3 4| 1-2, 4. 12). 3 3,6(21* B.Si9i 
Sunflower. 2.4(2) 

Sun-moon pairing. 3 3 3(71* 8 8(91 
Super fixed characters 4 1 *3(2-31.4. 1-4(1 1 
Svmbob alchemical, 3 3.1P1* 4 1 3(3». 8.8(1 1 89(3' 9.2 ' * 
aicroiogicaJ. 4.13(3). 92(31, looped. 4J4M. O medit-il. 
9 401. 9 4.2(1-31 
Srncaregoremit*. 9 3(3) 

Synthesis of man* disciplines in Vovnirh manuscript. 22liHi. 
3.2.3(41*3.4(1) 

Table. cipher. 54{3-3. 7-8), 9 4.4&lt; 3— 6» 

Tails* on Jenen* 4.1*3(21 

Talismans See Images, magical 

Taurus. Zodic ugn of* 2.2*2(31* 3 3 3(3)* fig 16 

Telescope. 5-1-2(31.7.3(4) 

Temurah (concept m Cabala*. 6*7(11 

Tepenea./acobvs Htrcickr de IKS). 1,2(2). 2*) ( 10-1 1 , 15&gt; 

Theophrairui of Eretus , 1 0 1 2 ) 

Thorndike. Lmn. 2.2. 2t 3 ) . 7 3( 5 1 
Thoth* 8.2(2) 

Tiltman. John H.* I.U9* 2.2*10-2). 3J(2i* 3 2 3 - J * 

3 5 7(0. 4 1.2(0, 4*1.301. 4 AtlK 5 2(5l* 3.4(71, 6h2). 
6*3(1* 3). 6-60-9), 6.8(1)* 7.3(4), on beginning -middle end 
Hrucmrr of VuroiCh text *wdf . 4.4(101. 4. 4*21 1 7 )* 6 6i l*2l, 
8*1(10, 9.2(7)* 9,3(51. fig 27* crrpunalmt stud* of 
Voynich manuscript. 2.2. 1(6), 4. 1.3(4), 6 6(1-7)* 6-7(1, 3l. 
hu dr of herbal*. 2-2,2(3-5i* 2 3(5). 2 4(5)* 3 3-1(2. 5 8i. 
3*3 .5(6), 6.6(8). 10(1); stud? of irmfrenc languages. 6.3* 4i. 
6.6f 3*7). 9.2(7) 

Tiro. Marcus T wUnw 9.1(11 
Tirocuan hand. 4.4.2(61. 91(0 
Ttroiuan nouuon. 4 4-2l6l. 9 IiIj 
T-M ap” ( conwentiocialued map of the world J. 3 3 4i4. 6. Ill* 
3 3 6(2), 4.2(6) 

Toad, as alchemy symbol. 8. 8(6. 9) 

Transcribing of Vormch text. 4*1*3(41, 4 4(9) 6*1(8). 6,2(2-5i, 
6 4(1. 31, 6 6(21. 6 7(1-2) 

Transposition. 4.4(6). 4. 4. 2(2. 5.10 
Tnthrnuui* 5 3f M. 8*2(2)* 8.6M 1* 9.2(31 
Tubm. 3-i.li4)* 3.3 3(2) 

Tubes* 3 3 3f2)* 3 3 5(2* 6) 

Tubs. 3*3.114). 3.3.5(2-31, 8.8i9i 
Tunics, 8.1 1(11, figs. 10* 37 

Turner, herbal of* 10J 101 * 


139 


Units, crrptanalvtic. 4 4*2(4, 14-15) 

"Universal Character '. 6*6(5) 


Vapor, 33 4(1-14. 10s, 5.5 5r5i,8 5r5i. H81O1 

Vanani forms o( Vovnich ivmboU. -U 3 i 4 &gt;. 4 l. 4 i l-2i. fig 2Q‘ 

Variants erTfxaaaJrcn:. 44,2(4 14-15, |7~18L 5.1, HU, 

3,4(4 7-8), 6.6D-61, 9,2(5-61 
Vetk. 3,3*5(21, 3 i.5(H.8.um, fig*. 10, 3 7 
Vellum. 2.1(21* 2,2*1(11. 2*4t L 3) 

Ve*s, 3.3*30) 

V«eL akbetruoU, 8 . 8(91 

Vigenere table. 4.4.21 101 

VOtara. Arnolduiof 3 . 3 . 1(51 

Virgo. Zodiac sign of. 2 - 4 t 31 * fig 10 

V wool, mvxscai. 3*2,3( I. 3 -'l. 9 43 l 1 - 2 ). 9 . 4 . 413 - 6 ) 

Vital *pm», 3 . 4 t 2 ) 

Von Schonau. Elizabeth, 9 . 4 . 3 c 21 
Von Trend. Chnnaai, 94 . 3 ( 2 ) 

Vowek, dropping of 442 ( 5 - 6 . 14 ) 

Vo™ct i, Ethd, 1 . 2 ( 61 . 2 . 4 l 4 ). 42m, 6.1121.6.5(11 

Vovmdi. Wilfrid UlJ, 4 - 9 . ID. 12 ( 5 - 6 . 8 ) 2 II 1 -I 6 L 

2.2,1 (U, 2.2*2(11. 2.5m. 2.4(1), 3*2, HU. 3-3-3C1K 

5-4111. 4.2(10). 5im.5 1.2l3). b.lfll 

Vwiuch script 5 #* icnpt Vovruch 

Warmth ai a haling principal. 3.3 5(51. 8.5(41 
W,trr. .U.4I6.^, W4 W Liquid; Mourarr 


Waves, &gt; 3 4r. 9-|0i 
Weather. 3 3 4(3) 

WheeL cipher, 8 1(5), 9,2(3) 

Wilkins, John, synthetic Language of. 6.2(3), 6 6(3-4)* 9.2(71, 
9. 3(4 1 

WiUiaJohn. then hand iritrm of. 9,1 ,3(1 K fig 38 
Wind^ i.3*3( 10). 3.3.414, 10-U) 

Word index. 4.4(9). 6. 1 (8). 6.3(2), 6.4(21 
Word lengths. 4.4. 1(6) 

Word spacing in Voynich text. 4.4. 1 (4) 

’ Words . in Votmch text brginmnr tfiiddLe end itruaurc 
44(10 1. 4.42(9. 171* 6,6(1-21. 8.1111), 9.2r), 9 5(5 1, lie 
27; lengths of. 4.4. tl6); order of irmboh in. 4 4(1 Of. 4 4. ltd i 
4.42(9 17), 6.6(1-21, 8.1(111, 9.2(7). 9 3(5) fig 2’. 

peiccrra of kmn in. 4. 1.4(1), 4.4.2(10), 5 4(3); repetition 
of 4 4(2-3, 6-8). 44. l(fn.l, 442(8, 10-11. 161.9 42(2) 

Yale University, 1.2(8). 33*6(2), 5,31 1. 4), 5 4 1 ) 

Zodiac, ugm of 2.2,2(51. 2*3(4). 2.4(3). 3-2 3(1* 4, 3-3 3(1. 

3), 42(1 1 1, 8.3(2-51. fig 10 
Zohar.8 7(1) 




140 